Title: S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.09924v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 00:23:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
# S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 

Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗ 

> 1

Computer Science Dept., College of Staten Island, CUNY 2800 Victory Blvd, Staten Island, NY 10314, U.S.A.  

> 2

Hunter College High School 71 East 94th Street, New York, NY 10128, U.S.A.  

> ∗

Corresponding Author Email: xiaowen.zhang@csi.cuny.edu Abstract. We design and develop a secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model (S 3CDM) that can detect unauthorized or illegal activities (especially insider attacks) and protect sensitive information within complex network infrastructures of large organizations. The model splits a se-cret among a group of legitimate participants or components for authentication, integration and detection of unauthorized activities. Traditional Shamir’s polynomial interpolation based and our own hash function based schemes are utilized in the model, they both are practical and efficient to make sure the communications between different components are secure and any unauthorized activities can be detected. The model offers a flexible multifactor authentication method to en-hance the overall system security. Probability analysis [3] shows that multiple component model is more resistant against cyberattacks than the single component one. To demonstrate the feasibility, we implement the S 3CDM in three parts on Google Cloud Platform, i.e., the frontend UI (User Interface) running on an HTTP server, the backend individual services written in Python, and a PostgreSQL database. Docker is used to manage the start and stop of individual services and their URLs. We demonstrate how to use the UI with a use case of simulation of broken path in details. Key words: Cyberattack detection, secret sharing scheme, authentication, authorization, Google Cloud Platform.      

> arXiv:2604.09924v1 [cs.CR] 10 Apr 2026 2Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

## 1 Introduction 

A cyber threat [8] is “any circumstance or event with the potential to adversely im-pact organizational operations (including mission, functions, image, or reputation), orga-nizational assets, individuals, other organizations, or the Nation through an information system via unauthorized access, destruction, disclosure, or modification of information, and/or denial of service.” Even worse, the threat could come from an insider that is supposed to be a trusted entity in an organization, with access to sensitive information and critical resources. [7, 9] classify insider threats and detection approaches into several classes. Insider threats are one of the most challenging attacks. Secret sharing schemes are a much better solution to defeat or mitigate insider threats. Living in the cyber realm, almost everything is handled and stored in networked computers. All of our information, from everyday routine activities, such as shopping, banking, and health care, to very important critical infrastructure runnings, such as elec-tric grid, water system, transportation system, and homeland security, are being stored in the cloud-based remote servers. Our national critical infrastructures, manufactures, homeland security, financial institutions, and countless other industries are all controlled by computer systems. Hackers or attackers are persistently using any means, including social engineering, attacking networks, penetrating authentication systems of sensitive in-formation and critical actions. They utilize bots, launch denial of service attacks, and send out millions of phishing messages/emails. Furthermore, in a lot of cases, the attackers are the insiders of organizations. It is too risky to let one individual or one entity hold the complete control or key to an access of critical computer systems. A secret sharing scheme is a mechanism to safeguard a secret with the added feasibility of availability and access control. There are a lot of applications of secret sharing schemes. Intrusion detection and threat detection systems are an extremely important part of cybersecurity measure. We design and develop a cyberattack detection model, which is based on secret sharing schemes, for detecting unauthorized or illegal activities and safeguarding sensitive infor-mation within complex network infrastructures of large organizations. The model splits a secret among a group of participants or components, uses secret sharing schemes for authentication, integration and detection of unauthorized activities. Probability analy-sis [3] shows that multiple component model is more resistant against cyberattacks than the single component one. Traditional polynomial interpolation-based and hash function based schemes are utilized in the model, they both are practical and efficient to make sure the communications between different components are secure and any unauthorized S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 3

activities can be detected. To demonstrate the feasibility, we implement the model in three parts on Google Cloud Platform, i.e., the frontend UI (User Interface) running on an HTTP server, the backend individual services written in Python, and a PostgreSQL database. We also demonstrate how to use the UI with a use case. The rest of paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we explain secret sharing schemes, especially perfect and ideal threshold schemes, access structure, and authorized subset. Furthermore, we describe the setup and secret recovering procedures for hash function based schemes, and properties. In Section 3 we give reasons for the cyberattack detection model, and then describe it with examples. As integral parts of the model, action database and operation algorithm are introduced with examples. In Section 4, we explain model implementation setup and request, which specify the interconnections of the devices and allowed request types. In Section 5, we explain the model implementation methodologies that split the task into the frontend UI, backend individual services, and a single database. In Section 6, we demonstrate the implementation on Google Cloud Platform with a use case. Finally, we summarize and conclude the paper in Section 7. 

## 2 Secret sharing schemes 

A secret sharing scheme is a method to distribute a secret among a group of par-ticipants by giving a share of the secret to each. The secret can be recovered only if a sufficient number of participants combines their shares. Formally, we have a secret S and a group of n participants. A dealer splits S into n

shares and sends shares to each participant privately; then the dealer discards S and all shares. Later on, if a sufficient number of participants returns their shares to the dealer, the dealer combines the shares to recover the secret. Let t ≤ n, an (t, n)-threshold scheme is one with n total participants and in which any t participants can combine their shares and recover the secret, but not fewer than t. The number t is called the threshold. Secret sharing scheme was formalized mathematically in independent papers in 1979 by Adi Shamir [10] and George Blakley [1]. Shamir scheme is based on polynomial interpolation, while Blakley’s is from a geometric solution based on hyperplanes. For more detailed discussions, please see our survey article [2]. First, we discuss some key concepts and properties of secret sharing schemes. Then we briefly introduce a hash-based secret sharing scheme [4, 5] and its properties, which is used as an alternative scheme in the model. 4 Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

2.1 Some key concepts A group of participants, which can recover the secret when they return their shares to the dealer, is called an authorized subset. On the other hand, any group of participants that cannot recover the secret is called an unauthorized subset. An access structure 

Γ is a set of all authorized subsets. Given any access structure 

Γ , an authorized subset A ∈

Γ is called a minimal au-thorized subset if any subset A′ ⊊ A then A′ /∈

Γ . We use 

Γ0 to denote a minimal access structure, i.e., the set of all minimal authorized subsets of 

Γ . In a (t, n) threshold scheme, let P be the set of the participants, we have 

Γ = {A|A ⊆ P and |A| ≥ t},

Γ0 = {A|A ⊆ P and |A| = t}. (1) In secret sharing, we first define the access structure. Then, we realize the access structure by a secret sharing scheme. A Shamir (t, n) threshold scheme allows no partial information to be given out even if up to t − 1 participants joined together [6]. A secret sharing scheme with this property is called a perfect scheme. Based on the information theory, the length of any share must be at least as long as the secret itself in order to have perfect secrecy. Up to t − 1

participants recover no information about the secret under perfect scheme, but when one extra participant joins the group, the secret can be recovered. That means any participant has their share at least as long as the secret. If the shares and the secret come from the same domain, we call it an ideal scheme. In this case, the shares and the secret have the same size. 2.2 Hash function-based scheme An efficient and flexible hash function-based secret sharing scheme was designed in [4], its setup for share generation/distribution and secret recovering are as follows. Setup a) We randomly generate n distinct shares s1, . . . , sn for n participants P1 . . . , Pn, where the size of each share is the same as that of the hash. Then we send si to Pi via a secure channel. b) We determine all the minimal authorized subsets. Suppose we have A1, . . . , Aw minimal authorized subsets. Each participant holds a share and combination of the shares of any S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 5

one of these w authorized subsets will form a private message Mpriv . The combination will be the concatenation of the shares in participant sequence. For example, if an authorized subset consists of P1, P3 and P4, then the Mpriv = s1|| s3|| s4.c) Calculate the hash for each authorized subset Ai as follows 

H(Mpriv i ) = hi, i = 1, . . . , w. (2) d) Let h be the secret and of the same size of hi. If we want the secret to be random, we can generate it in the same way as we do for shares. Or h is a pre-determined fixed secret. e) Finally we generate a control ci for each authorized subset as follows (here ⊕ is bitwise XOR): 

ci = hi ⊕ h, i = 1, . . . , w. (3) A control also can be used to determine whether a subset is authorized or not. After the setup process each participant Pi gets a random share si, i = 1, . . . , n. Public information for each authorized subset ci, where i = 1, . . . , w, is generated. Control area 

ci’s help to herd all the intermediate hashes hi’s to the final hash h. Algorithm 1 shows how secret and shares are being generated. Secret recovering Suppose authorized subset Ai consists of participants P1, . . . , Pb. Joining together they can recover the secret as follows, also see Algorithm 2. a) Get the public information ci.b) H(s1|| s2|| . . . || sb) = hi, and hi ⊕ ci = h.This applies to any authorized subset, see Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. 

Fig. 1: Secret recovery for any authorized subset. Fig. 2: A (3, 4) general threshold scheme. 6 Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

Properties of the scheme a) We take random bit-strings of the same length for the shares and secret, any group of up to t − 1 participants cannot get any additional information about the secret than any outsider. Thus, the hash-based scheme is perfect and ideal. b) The calculation of hash function is fast. No complicated or intensive computation, such as polynomial evaluation/interpolation, is needed. The scheme only uses minimal authorized subsets. Thus, we speed up the scheme setup and secret recovery processes. c) This approach can be extended to any general access structure. And the scheme is flexible, as any cryptographic hash function can handle any message of arbitrary length so there is no limit to the number of participants. d) No special hardware or software is required. For example, no need to handle a large number or find a large prime, etc. 

## 3 The cyberattack detection model 

3.1 Model description Instead of letting a party own or control a secret, a secret sharing scheme protects the secret by splitting the responsibilities to different shares, each of which is owned by a participant. A secret may be a sensitive document, a decryption key for an important file, or anything such as an index for retrieval of important actions as described below. There are many areas related to secret sharing schemes, but here we want to apply secret sharing to authentication, integration, and detection of unauthorized activities for security improvements. Nowadays, we are dealing with complex infrastructure and networks consisting of many components (such as servers, routers, switches, computers, smart phones, etc.) linked together. These components communicate with one another and work together to make the whole system functioning. Here we refer to those devices sending and receiving signals as controllers and nodes, respectively. A signal can be a packet of message, operational control information, or authentication information. Based on software defined network (SDN), communication paths and routes can be easily adjusted to accommodate the traffic conditions at any time. Also, duplicated paths and routes are set up in order to solve problems such as broken links, the single point of failure, etc. We follow the SDN idea to assign more controllers working together for a communication, which is originally done by just one controller. No additional hardware is required. Instead of sending a direct S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 7

Data: threshold, number_of_shares Result: secret and a number of shares if threshold > number_of_shares then # fail invalid end # Create a secret, and the given number of shares, each participant gets one share secret. array_of_shares = create_crypto_secrets(number_of_shares) # Generate all combinations of participants of size “threshold”: # For example, given tn(2,3), threshold = 2, number of shares = 3, it should return [ [1,2], [1,3], [2,3] ] list_of_authorized_subsets = generate_possible_combinations(number_of_shares, threshold) for each subset in authorized_subsets do initialize empty private_message bytes for each participant_index in subset do # for example subset = [1,2] share = get_shares(participant_index) private_message concatenate share # a hashing function of choice, e.g. SHA1, SHA256 hashed_private_message = hash_function(private_message) control_message = hashed_private_message XOR secret end # associate controlMessage with its Authorized Subset and store safely store secret, controlMessage and subset indexes # each participants gets their own share in later of the process distribute shares to participants end Algorithm 1: Function N_hash_shares_setup(threshold, number_of_shares) 8 Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

Initialize empty private_message bytes # sort the provided shares by participant index to ensure consistent ordering for each share in shares orderly do private_messages concatenate share end # a hashing function of choice, e.g. SHA1, SHA256 hashed_private_message = hash_function(private_message) control_message = get control for given participants if control_message not found or length not matched then # fail recovery end if secret == (hashed_private_message XOR control_message) then return successful end else return failed end Algorithm 2: Function recover_secrets(map_of_participant_index, shares) signal by a controller, a few are sending the shares of the signal that are not easily forged [3]. In Fig. 3, suppose controller C1 finds out there is traffic jam in path P1 from node N1

to node N2. It directs/orders node N1 to switch to path P2 to avoid the delays. 

Fig. 3: Single controller: switch path to P2. Fig. 4: Multiple controllers: switch path to P2.What would happen if controller C1 were hacked and under control and the hacker carried out harmful activities to the system? Our solution is to employ more controllers to make the decision for enhanced security. In Fig. 4, we deploy a (3, 2)-threshold secret sharing scheme for authentication. Instead of just sending direct signals, the controllers are sending the shares of secret that are not easily forged if they are well protected. Based S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 9

on the shares node N1 receives, it tries to recover the secret. In this case, the secret that recovered is just an index pointing to a record in a database which consists of all the actions. The recovered secret or index will be used to search the associated action in the database. In Fig. 4, “switch the path to P2” will be returned to node N1. If the index is not found in the database, no action will follow, and a detection of illegal activities will come up. We can see the advantage here. Even if all controllers are compromised, it does not mean that the intruder can get the shares of secrets. This is similar to the analogy that even if a thief can break into a house it does not necessarily mean that he can find the owner’s valuables. Also, it is more effective for integration protection and detection. 3.2 Action database The action database can be considered as a hierarchy layer for controlling protection measures. Let us use Table 1 to illustrate this. Suppose Node 2 receives a signal from Controller 1. If there is a record with the field Level equal to 0, that means no checking is required for any request from Controller 1 to Node 2. Any request Ri will be allowed if there is a record with field Level 9 corresponding to Ri in the database. Table 1: An example action table. From To Level Request Action ... ... ... ... ...1 2 1 R1 A1, A1a, A1b

1 2 1 R2 A2

1 2 1 R3 A3

1 2 1 R4 A4

1 2 1 R5 A5

1 2 2 S6 A6

1 2 2 S7 A7

1 2 2 S8 A8

... ... ... ... ...If there is no record with Level 0 existing, then we continue further checking. Records with field Level equal to 1 are for the first level checking. In Table 1, there are five Level 1 records. If the request is one of these requests R1, . . . , R5, it is valid and allowed to continue 10 Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

process. If it is not, we check if there are any Level 2 records. If no, that means this request is invalid and there will be a feedback to review if Node 1 is compromised. If yes, based on the information about the secret sharing scheme pre-defined in Node 2, we carry out the secret recovering process to recover the secret. If recovered secret is one of the secrets 

S6, . . . , S8, it is valid and allowed to continue. Otherwise, the request will be declined and feedback will be reviewed to see if there is any component(s) being hacked. For both Level 1 and 2 records, we have an option to append additional requests, just like the original request triggers these additional steps/requests. For example, A1

can trigger A1a, A1b, etc. (in Table 1). This gives us more flexibility. By adding a Level-0 record, we can temporarily halt all the checking in case we have the network upgrade, maintenance, etc. For those critical requests such as R6, we put S6/A6 instead of R6/A6 in the action database. Once node 2 receives R6 request, based on an algorithm and internal information, node 2 will derive S6 and use it to get the corresponding A6. Please refer to 4.1 for details. 3.3 Algorithm There are n controllers C1, . . . , Cn for a Level 2 security request Ri with corresponding 

n shares Si,1, . . . , Si,n. The secret is Si and the corresponding action in the Action DB is Ai.A sufficient number of controllers forms an authorized subset; all authorized subsets form an access structure. The cyberattack detection model runs Algorithm 1 against Action Database to carry out the actions. To summarize, we can extend the idea of secret sharing to authentication and cyber-attack detection. Instead of relying on one party’s decision, we can split it up among a few parties and come up with the decision only if the predefined criteria are satisfied. Also, instead of getting a direct signal, which gets forged more easily, we use the shares of the secret in order to increase the security level. 

## 4 Model implementation setup and request 

We need to specify the interconnections of the devices and what types of requests are allowed. If a request is allowed, depending on the importance, what kind of security measures are needed. This setup is dynamic and needs to be updated whenever required. Once the setup is done, the system will be functioning accordingly. We refer the messages exchanged between the devices as tickets. It generally contains the required S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 11 

Data: Shares from controllers: Si,1, . . . , Si,n

Result: Response from Action Database and/or entries in audit file 10 Get shares Si,1, . . . , Si,n from controllers C1, . . . , Cn, respectively. 20 Construct the set of minimal authorized subset 

Γ0.30 Pick up an authorized subset B ∈

Γ0 not yet processed. If no more such B,respond invalid key, goto 70. 40 Recover the secret Si based on B.50 Use the secret Si recovered from 40 as key to read the Action DB. If a record Ai is found, goto 60. Else write down B to an audit list file for further analysis, then goto 30. 60 Carry out the action Ai.70 Check the audit list file to find out if there are any authorized subset(s) fail to recover the secret. 80 End. Algorithm 3: Multiple controllers with database information such as the request or the actions plus the timestamp. One device may receive the same duplicate tickets which are used as consistency and authentication checking. 4.1 Setup We have a program P, which acts as a security agent to grant access to and commu-nicate with other components and as a dealer to create shares and recover the secret. In Section 5, program P is embedded in Dealer service. To begin with, we need to create type 9 records in the action database, which are the valid requests. Refer to Table 2, we have valid requests R1, . . . , R99 and the corresponding actions A1, . . . , A99 . Then, we need to set up all the communications between controllers/nodes as follow. First, P asks if there are any restrictions between the controller and node and then set up accordingly. Case 1: No restrictions Suppose there is no restriction between controller C1 and node N2. P will create a type 0 record in the action database, see Table 3. That means C1 can send any request to N2

and as long as there is a corresponding type 9 record in the database, N2 will follow the action in the type 9 record. Case 2: With restrictions a) Level 1 records: Suppose there are restrictions between controller C3 and node N4. P

will not create the type 0 record in the action database for C3/N4. Instead, P will create 12 Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

Table 2: Action table – valid requests From To Level Request Action 0 0 9 R1 A1

0 0 9 R2 A2

0 0 9 R3 A3

... ... ... ... ...0 0 9 R99 A99 

Table 3: No restrictions from C1 to N2

From To Level Request Action 1 2 0all the type 1 records corresponding to those requests that are allowed from C3 to N4

in the action database, please see Table 4. C3 can send requests R2, R7, and R8 to N4.Table 4: Restrictions from C3 to N4 – level 1 setup From To Level Request Action 3 4 1 R2 A2

3 4 1 R7 A7

3 4 1 R8 A8

b) Level 2 records: P will continue to set up level 2 checking for C3/N4. Suppose R3 is in this level, P will create the following type 2 record in the database. Note that S3 is the secret corresponding to R3 in Table 5. 

P will determine the participants manually or automatically. Suppose we need a (2, 3)

threshold scheme and the participants are controllers C3,C5 and C6. P runs an algorithm (as dealer) to set up the secret S3 and its shares S3,1, S3,2, S3,3 and assign them to 

C3,C5,C6, respectively. C3/C5/C6 will save the following information in their internal table, see Table 6. The first row is the internal table for C3 –- it is the main controller for C3-N4-R3 request and it needs to send out tickets (triggers) to C5 and C6. The second and third rows are the internal tables for C5 and C6, respectively. And P will also create the corresponding share records in the Shares table, see Table 7. S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 13 

Table 5: Restrictions from C3 to N4 – level 2 setup From To Level Request Action 3 4 2 S3 A3

Table 6: Internal tables for three controllers C3,C5,C6

From To Request Participants Share Internal Table for 3 4 R3 C5,C6 S3,1 C3

3 4 R3 S3,2 C5

3 4 R3 S3,3 C6

4.2 Request Case 1: When controller C1 sends a request R1 to node N2, N2 will call P to verify. Since a type 0 record exists for C1/N2, P will check if there is a type 9 record for R1.If yes, P will send A1 to N2 and acknowledges the approval to C1 and N2. Otherwise, it will inform the decline of the request. Case 2: When controller C3 sends a request R2 to node N4, N4 will call P to verify. Since a type 0 record does not exist, it will proceed to the next step. Since a type 1 record exists for C3/N4/R2, P will send A2 to N4 and acknowledges the approval to C3 and 

N4.Case 3: Controller C3 sends a request R3 to node N4, see Fig. 5 for request sequence diagram. When C3 sends a request R3 to N4, it finds out C3-N4-R3 is in its internal table. C3 sends to P and N4, then N4 needs to acknowledge the ticket. When P has both the initial request from C3 and the acknowledgement from N4, it verifies request shares from participants. It also sends out the ticket and its share to P. N4 will send out the ticket to P for approval. Once P verifies the consistency of the tickets from C3 and N4 and finds out C3-N4-R3 is in the shares table, it generates a ticket and sends it to C5,C6 to ask for their shares. Controllers C5,C6 will verify the consistency of the tickets from C3 and P. If yes, they will send their tickets and shares S3,2 and S3,3 to P, respectively. 14 Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

Table 7: Shares table for P

From To Request Participants Scheme 3 4 R3 C3 (2, 3)

3 4 R3 C5 (2, 3)

3 4 R3 C6 (2, 3)

After verification, P recovers the secret S3 using (S3,1, S3,2) or (S3,1, S3,3) and gets A3

from the action database. [Note that we use (S3,1, S3,2) or (S3,1, S3,3) as minimal authorized subsets because C3 is the main controller, we emphasize its importance/contribution when recovering the secret, and ignore the authorized subset (S3,2, S3,3).] It sends the actions(s) 

A3 to node N4 together with the ticket. P will inform C3 and N4 if the request is approved. 

P also sends “approved” to C5 and C6, so it can mark for UI to grey out. Steps for C3:

· 1.1: Timestamp-C3-N4-R3, S3,1 (ticket and share to P)

· 1.2: Ticket to N4

Steps for N4:

· 2.1: Timestamp-C3-N4-R3 (ticket to P)Steps for P,C5,C6:

· 3.1: Ask for shares form C5 and C6

· 3.1.1: Verification the consistency for the tickets both from C3 and P

· 3.1.2: Timestamp-C3-N4-R3, S3,2 (ticket and share to P from C5)

· 3.1.3: Timestamp-C3-N4-R3, S3,3 (ticket and share to P from C6)

· 3.2: Verification for consistency of tickets 

· If yes from 3.2, do 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5 

· 3.3: Recover secret S3 and get action(s) A3

· 3.4: Send action(s) A3 to N4

· 3.5: Inform approval of request C3-N4-R3 to C3 and N4

· If no from 3.2, do 3.6 

· 3.6: Send reject signal to C3 and C4

Steps for N4:

· 4.1: Once there is a match between the tickets from C3 and P, carry out actions(s) A3S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 15 

Fig. 5: Request case 3 model sequence in a diagram. 16 Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

## 5 Model implementation methodologies 

The model implementation is split into three sections, the UI also known as the fron-tend, individual services also known as the backend, and a persistence layer using a single Postgres Database. 5.1 UI - Frontend The UI operates on an HTTP server fulfilling two primary purposes. Its first purpose is to deliver the UI dashboard page to end-users accessing it via a browser. This dashboard, constructed with HTML and Javascript utilizing React.js and Bootstrap for component development, serves as the main interaction point for users to run project simulations. It displays and allows on-demand editing of scheme configurations, shares, action requests, and route configurations to control overall system behavior. The UI’s second purpose is to provide endpoints that direct calls from the dashboard to the appropriate backend services. This architecture eliminates the need for the UI dashboard to know the individual URLs of each service, instead requiring it only to call its service. For instance, when a user updates the secret share scheme to a hash function-based scheme and adjusts its threshold, the dashboard sends an HTTP POST request to the UI server. The UI server then uses a Naming Registry to locate the dealer’s URL and forwards the request to the dealer accordingly. 5.2 Python - Backend The model’s backend implementation is written in Python and comprises four main services. 1) Dealer - Responsible for creating, distributing shares, and recovering secret 2) Controller - Holding on one piece of share, requesting actions and responding to other controllers requests 3) Node - Performing actions upon a successful secret recovery 4) Name Registry - A registry of service URLs and directing traffics Core Framework For all of the services, we can think of it as a micro-service architec-ture, where each individual service is designed with specific, distinct responsibilities. To maintain consistency across these independent services, this core framework is developed to handle commonly used functions. For communication between services, each service S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 17 

has implemented a set of RESTful endpoints. Each endpoint allows the service either accepting an input via HTTP POST request, or providing information via HTTP GET request. This project leverages the Twisted [https://docs.twistedmatrix.com] as the core library to run each service as an HTTP server individually. Below is a list of the Python libraries used in the implementation. – requests - makes HTTP requests – psycopg-binary - PostgreSQL Driver for Python – psycopg - PostgreSQL Driver Python wrapper – twisted - HTTP server library – shamirs - A Python implementation of Shamir scheme Endpoints for Simulation To facilitate end-user simulation of various use cases, all ser-vices include a set of administrative endpoints designed to update their internal data. For instance, a dedicated ‘reset’ endpoint on a controller service allows resetting all shares, while a similar ‘reset’ endpoint on a dealer service resets all action and action request in-formation. Additionally, endpoints prefixed with ’command’ enable end-users to simulate and trigger specific actions on a service. Dealer A dealer service is responsible for generating and distributing shares to partic-ipating controllers, performing secret recovery for an action request when the required number of shares are collected, and auditing logs. First the dealer service has a set of endpoints that are related to scheme and ac-tion configurations. One endpoint facilitates the configuration of a Secret sharing scheme, accepting either a Hash-based scheme or a Shamir scheme. This configuration includes parameters for threshold and total shares to be generated based on the number of partic-ipants. Another endpoint is implemented to accept a list of actions from an admin user. The list of actions should have a from controller, a to target node, the security level the request name or identifier, and action alias, see Table 1 for an example. A third endpoint is to trigger the secret generation. It starts processing one row at a time. For each row it will generate secret and create shares according to the number of participants, then distribute them. The next set of endpoints are related to secret recovery. One endpoint accepts an action request from controllers. Another endpoint accepts a share during an action request that a participant controller responds the request its share. This endpoint collects the shares, 18 Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

when the number of shares meet the threshold, it triggers the secret recovery function. There are two outcomes from the secret recovery function, passed or failed. In both case, the dealer notifies all involved controllers, but only notifies node when it is passed. – /command/action allows an end-user to send a list of request and action configurations to generate secrets and shares. – /command/init-action allows an end-user to trigger the secret and share generation and distribution. – /command/scheme-config allows an end-user to configure the scheme and threshold values. – /command/tn-participant-config allows an end-user to choose the participants and selection strategy when deciding which controller to pick when generating shares. – /accept-shares accept share from a controller. – /action-request accepts a new action request from a controller. – /forward-action-request accepts an acknowledgment from a node for an action request, then asks the participant controllers to return the shares. Controller A controller service is responsible for holding on the shares of any given action that it is participated in, raising action requests, and responding the share when an action request needs it. For this model implementation we also simulate that a controller is corrupted or comprised by altering any of the share so that secret recovery is not successful. The following is the list of endpoints and their behaviors. – /secret allows dealer to push shares to the controller. This also allows the end-user to simulate a corrupted controller by sending in a new share. – /command/action-request allows the end-user to simulate raising an action-request of any action if this controller is the main controller. – /ask-for-shared-secret raises an action request, the dealer is asking participated con-trollers to respond its share for this action. – /command/respond-share allows, for simulation, an end-user to trigger the controller to react to an action request on demand. – /action-request-result allows the dealer to push secret recovery result to the controller. Node A node is a service that carries out an actual action. Currently, upon an action request sent from a controller, the corresponding node is implemented to automatically respond with an acknowledge message to the dealer. This acknowledgment will allow the S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 19 

dealer try to recover the secret when the required number of shares are collected. On the other hand, it would perform an actual action when the dealer sends a successful recovery message for a given action request. Each of these is an HTTP endpoint that accepts valid messages. – /action-request accepts an action-request then automatically responds to the dealer that it acknowledges it. – /action-request-result when a secret recovery is successful, the node will perform the action. Name Registry One of the crucial components in this project is the Name Registry ser-vice. It acts as a DNS (domain name system) provider, when a service name is queried, it would return its URL. However, because of a routing requirement a more advanced implementation is built into the Name Registry. Out of all messaging between individual services, either it is a share request, or a recovery response, or an action, the main goal is to guarantee the message delivery. When a path is broken between service A and service B, the routing mechanism would look for an alternate route, maybe from service A to Service C, then from Service C to service B to deliver this message. On a second scenario, if the path from service A to service B has high traffics or weights, then the routing mechanism would provide a better route to deliver the message. Therefore, Name Registry has all URLs on all services and the weights between them. These weights are editable to simulate when a link is broken, or traffic increases between any of the nodes. To achieve the requirement in a more flexible way, it is implemented as a turn by turn basis, similar to a GPS alike behavior. In the following explanation, we would use the term, origin, destination, from-node, and to-node to describe each party for a given message to deliver. The Name Registry itself contains some computation for any given hosts using Dijkstra’s shortest path. For example, when a message is originated from service A, and the destination is Service B. The condition of the network or paths is that, Service A has no direct connection to Service B. In this case, service A would first asks Name Registry, that it would want to go to service B (destination). The name registry computes a shortest path, and in this example, we would say Service C is one unit(weight) to Service A, and also one unit to Service B. It is obvious that From A to B, it can first go to C, then B. There for, Name Registry would return the URL of service C. Then Service A would put all the information of origin (Service A), destination (Service B), from-node (Service A), and to-node (Service C) into the message then send it over to 20 Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

Service C. This is because we wanted to achieve a turn by turn lookup, so that, it is more real time and can adapt sudden changes to make additional detours when needed. Service C now received the message, and it looks at the destination information and it is not for Service C. So it would ask Name Registry for the routes from service C to service B. And for this request, the URL of Service B is returned. Service C would then package a similar destination information like Service A, and send the message. Finally when Service B gets the message, it checks and it is for service B, it continues to handle specific behavior for the message as normal. – /route allows an admin user to configure the path between services to simulate broken links or heavy traffic paths. – /path allows a service to query for destination and to return the next stop URL. 5.3 Database The choice of database in this model implementation is PostgreSQL. It is free and ACID (atomicity, consistency, isolation, and durability) compliant and used to stored actions and logs for recovery attempts. The following is the table schema. Table: action Columns: – from_node – to_node – level – request – action Table: audit_recovery Columns: – id serial primary key – reference_number – request – batch_id – is_success boolean, not null – context_nodes extra context information about the recovery – created_at timestamp S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 21 

5.4 Running Environment As previously stated, the model consists of four services, Dealer, Controller, Node and Name Registry. Out of the four services, Dealer and Name Registry have only one running instance each. However, Controller and Node in theory can have unlimited number of instances running. For demonstration purpose, we should have at least three Controller instances and two Node instances running in a complete system. This should relates to the threshold and total number of participants configuration of (t,n) threshold scheme. With this minimal system setting, we are to manage seven HTTP servers and one database. Docker [https://docker.com] is used to help managing the start and stop of individual services and their URLs. A docker compose yaml file contains all necessary information, including the number of Controllers and Nodes and their CPU and memory settings. Initializing the PostgreSQL database with the DDL (data definition language) schema and ensuring the services can connect to the Name Registry during run time. Finally, another key configuration is an ini file that maps the name of the service instances to the URLs. This file is loaded into Name Registry after it starts up. Then Name Registry would distribute the names to all instances. When the instance queries for a destination, the instance needs to send its name as its identifier to help computing the path to destination. The ini file is not the optimal solution because it requires manual effort to denote how many instances, their URLs, and Name Services restarted to take effect. However, it is a suitable solution as opposed to a more complex services discovery solution. By swapping ini configurations, the complete system can be run on the OS level of any personal computer, that is beneficial for local development of the model implementation. It can also run and scale up on controllers and nodes on docker, that is beneficial in running automated tests on a complete system. Another reason of using docker is that it provides the best portability and consistency on any platform. During build time, all Python scripts and required libraries are packaged using a Debian 12 Bookworm [https://www.debian.org/releases/bookworm/] with Python 3.12 image. Therefore, it can run on any underlying platform, operating system and CPU architecture as long as docker is supported. Google Cloud Platform provides a Virtual Machine with more than enough resources, and the model is running six Controllers, six Nodes, one Dealer, one Name Registry, and finally one database. This setup on Google Cloud Platform is large enough to run complex scenarios but still be manageable for navigating UI dashboard to perform any end-user simulations. 22 Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

## 6 Demo user interface and use cases 

To illustrate the idea, we implemented the proposed model on Google Cloud Platform with graphic user interface. In this section, we will explain and demonstrate how to use the user interface (UI) to simulate a complete flow of action requests and secret sharing schemes. Assuming there are a running instance of the UI, some controllers and nodes, and one dealer service. The demo is accessible by this link http://www.techep.csi.cuny.edu, on a server located in Computer Science Department at College of Staten Island. 6.1 UI overview The UI is broken up into sections, and each represents a different part of the system, see Fig. 6. The sections are as follows: – Refresh - The refresh button allows page auto-refresh every five seconds when it is turned on (click/press the button to make sure the little blue dot is on the right side). – Dealer Service - The dealer service is responsible for accepting inputs to generate shares for a secret. – Controllers - A list of all the controllers in the system. Each controller has its own controllers and buttons to raise requests, respond to requests, and view the status of the requests. It is also possible to alter the share of a controller to mimic the situation of a compromised controller. – Nodes - A list of all the nodes in the system. Each node has its own area to display requests that are sent to this node, and the event logs of the request. And lastly if a request is approved, the node will carry out the action and display the result. – Routes Config - I.e., the routes configuration, allows the user to edit the links or paths between the services. By default, all services (Controller, Nodes, and dealer) are connected to each other with a weight or distance of one. 6.2 Dealer service 1. By clicking “Scheme” box, we can configure the dealer to use Shamir scheme by choos-ing “Shamir” or Hash-based Scheme by choosing “Hash.” They both accept a threshold configuration of (t, n), where t is the threshold value, n is the total number of controllers (participants) to distribute the shares. For example in Fig. 7, by choosing “Shamir” in “Scheme” box, entering 3 in “Threshold” box and 5 in “Participants” box, we configure the system to use (2, 3)-threshold Shamir secret sharing scheme. S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 23 

Fig. 6: Secret sharing scheme based cyber attack detection project graphic user interface. 24 Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

2. Below is an editor area (if it is collapsed/folded, click the “Switch Scheme” button to expand/open the area), that allows user to enter the Action Database record delimited by a vertical bar ‘ |.’ For example in Fig. 7, the line in the edit area would signal the dealer, it is a Level 2 security request R1 from Controller C1 to Node N2, and the action is A1. Indeed, what happens behind the scene is that the dealer first recovers the secret 

S1, then uses S1 as the key/pointer to map to the request R1. Upon receiving the pay-load, the dealer should generate the secrets and shares based on scheme configuration. In this example, it is using (2, 3)-threshold Shamir scheme, and the Controller C1 is the main participant amongst the other two. Once finishing the editing of the Action Database records and selection of secret sharing scheme (either Shamir or Hash-based), click the red Submit button to reset all shares and requests. 

Fig. 7: Dealer service configuration and editing action database record Below is an example of a configuration with four requests entered in the editor area of the dealer service, R1, R2, R3, R4, and the corresponding actions A1, A2, A3, A4. Controller 

C1 is the main participant for request R1, Controller C3 is the main participant for R2

and R3, and Controller C2 is the main participant for R4.| From | To | L e v e l | Request | A c t i o n || 1 | 2 | 2 | R1 | A1 || 3 | 2 | 2 | R2 | A2 || 3 | 2 | 2 | R3 | A3 || 2 | 1 | 2 | R4 | A4 |6.3 Controllers The controller section displays more than one controller, and it wraps to next row if it cannot fit. In this demo, we use up to six controllers, see Fig. 6. Each controller has S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 25 

three expandable areas: Share, Requests, and Routing Forward Requests. Based on the example configuration at the end of section 6.2, after pressing the “Submit” button in the Dealer section of the UI, the controllers C1,C2, and C3 display four requests in their “Share” areas as in Fig. 8. 

Fig. 8: Share areas of controllers C1,C2,C3 before issuing any request. (a) Share This section shows all shares that this controller has in memory along with their request information. By clicking and expanding “Share” area, we see an icon of a little man with the right hand raised followed by “req” button (raise-hand) and “Show Share” button. Raise-hand req button: If the controller is the main participant for the request, then the raise-hand button in bold red is enabled and can be clicked, see Fig. 9. Otherwise, the button will be grayed in light red and cannot be clicked, which means the the controller in question is not the main participant and cannot raise request. Only main participant can raise requests, clicking on the raise-hand button will send the request to the dealer service. In Fig. 8, the controller C1 raise-hand req button for request R1 is highlighted below. It also shows that the destination node for this request is node N2 and C1 is the main participant. After raising request R1 by clicking req button, Fig. 8 becomes Fig. 10, where the request R1 is received by three participating controllers C1,C2, and C3.26 Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

Fig. 9: Raise-hand button for controller to raise request. 

Fig. 10: Share areas of controllers C1,C2,C3 after raising request R1.S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 27 

Change Share Clicking open Share button will show the share associated with this request. The user can change this value then click Update Share button at the bottom to change the value, see Fig. 11. Note that this action is unrecoverable, and it mimics the situation of a compromised controller. 

Fig. 11: Change share to mimic a compromised controller. (b) Request Status This section shows all requests that are currently in the system. It shows the status of the request, the action that is associated with the request, and the request number. The controllers that are part of a request will have a Respond button to respond to the request. Clicking on the button will signal the controller to send its share to dealer for this request for dealer secret recovery. Status indicator lines will display whether the request is successfully recovered or failed (c) Routing Forward Request This section shows all “passthrough” requests that are for another controller. Due to higher routing cost, the requests are routed via this controller because of a shorter path. 6.4 Nodes The nodes section displays more than one node, and it wraps to next row if it cannot fit, see Fig. 12. Each node has an area that shows – Request information The reference number, request name, etc. 28 Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

Fig. 12: Display of node section. – Action information When the request is approved, the node will perform the action. Most of these are system commands (e.g. shell commands like ls, pwd, etc.). The execution status and results are displayed here. – Event logs The journey of the requests. The node will start logging events when it receives the request. Upon receiving a recovery success, the node will carry out the action and display the result. Each step will have its corresponding log and timestamp. – Routing forward request Similar to controllers, each node also has a routing forward request section. This section shows all “passthrough” requests that are for another node. – Routes config The routes configuration allows the user to edit the links or paths between the services. By default, all services (Controller, Nodes, and dealer) are connected to each other with a weight or distance of one, see Fig. 13. To simulate a broken link between two services, we can either increase the weight to a high value, or set the link as disabled. For example, if we disable the link between dealer to S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 29 

node-1, traffic may be routed to node-2, then from node-2 to node-1, see Fig. 14. 

Fig. 13: Routes configuration UI and default weights of links. 

Fig. 14: Disable a link between the dealer and a node. 6.5 Use case 1: simulate broken path We will simulate a broken path between the dealer and a node. The end result will be that the node will receive the recovery result from another node, a so-called “passthrough” request, or forwarded request. We use Fig. 15 through Fig. 21 to illustrate this use case. 

• Fig. 15: First we use Hash-based (2, 3)-threshold scheme, in which we only need two shares out of three participants to recover the secret. 30 Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

• Fig. 16: We also make sure we reset any previous route configurations. 

• Fig. 17: Next, we will click on Controller 1 to raise a request which the action node is Node-2. 

• Fig. 18: Then, we simulate a broken path between the dealer and Node-2 by disabling it in the routes configuration table. 

• Fig. 19: After updating it, we can also refresh the page to verify that the route is disabled on the Routes Graph. 

• Fig. 20: We continue as normal to let the controllers respond to the request. We only need two controllers for this request to recover. 

• Fig. 21: Finally, we can see Node-2 actually performs an action. Since we disabled the path from dealer to Node-2, the recovery result should have traveled through some other node before reaching Node-2. We can see that Node-5’s Routing Forward Requests actually has one entry with the same reference number. That it was originated from dealer, and target to Node-2. 

Fig. 15: Use case: make choice of thrshold scheme. 

## 7 Conclusions and future work 

· We apply secret sharing schemes, especially hash function based schemes, into a real-world cyberattack detection model. The model runs an algorithm with multiple components and a database, which stores records of requests and their allowed actions. 

· The model implementation specifies the interconnections of the components and allowed request types. In the setup phase we consider no-restrictions and with-restrictions (level-1 and level-2) cases between a controller and node. S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 31 

Fig. 16: Use case: reset previous route configurations. 

Fig. 17: Use case: raise a request. 

Fig. 18: Use case: disable a path from route configuration table. 

Fig. 19: Use case: verify disabled path on the route graph. 32 Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

Fig. 20: Use case: recover secret using two controllers. 

Fig. 21: Use case: verify routing forward requests. S3CDM: A secret-sharing-scheme-based cyberattack detection model and its simulation implementation 33 

· The model implementation is split into the frontend UI, backend individ-ual services, and a persistent layer of a single Postgres Database. The UI serves as the end-user dashboard page and direction calls from dashboard to corresponding backend services. Backend, written in Python, consists of four main services, namely, dealer, controller, node, and name registry. A free database PostgreSQL is used to store actions and logs for recovery at-tempts. For running environment, Docker is used to manage the start and stop of individual services and their URLs. 

· The model is implemented on Google Cloud Platform with graphic user interface. We demonstrate how to use the UI to simulate a complete flow of action request and secret sharing schemes. We explain UI components and their functions, dealer service, controllers, and nodes. We also give a use case of simulation of broken path in details. 

· The project demo is hosted on Computer Science Department’s website per-manently. We will use it as an example to promote and enhance student research involvement in cybersecurity and related areas for all levels of stu-dents from high schoolers to graduate students. We’ll also integrate our re-search activities into the teaching to motivate more students to do research. It can be used as a few course modules for our undergraduate and gradu-ate cybersecurity, network security, cryptography, cloud computing, and/or software engineering courses. 

· Future work includes identifying compromised controllers based on a series of audit histories, or before we reissue new shares, we would ask each controller to provide their existing shares and validate their authenticity. 

## Funding 

This work was supported in part by a grant (Jul 2023 - Aug 2024) from Google Cyber NYC Institutional Research Program. 

## References  

> 1. G.R. Blakley, Safeguarding cryptographic keys. Proc. of the National Computer Conference, American Federation of Information Processing Societies Proceedings 48, (1979), pp. 313-317.

34 Chi Sing Chum 1, Jia Lu 1, Claire Tang 2, and Xiaowen Zhang 1,∗

2. C. Chum, B. Fine, and X. Zhang, A survey: Shamir threshold scheme and its enhancements. Chapter 2, Infinite Group Theory - From the Past to the Future, World Scientific Publishing, February 2018, pp. 19-41. 3. C. Chum, X. Wei, and X. Zhang, Cyber attack detection using secret sharing schemes. Proc. of 2023 IEEE 9th Int Conf. on Big Data Security and Cloud, New York, NY, May 6-8, 2023, pp.57-59. 4. C. Chum and X. Zhang, Hash function based secret sharing scheme designs. Security and Com-munication Networks (Wiley), 6(5), 2013, pp. 584-592. 5. C. Chum and X. Zhang. Implementations of a hash function based secret sharing scheme. Journal of Applied Security Research, 10(4), 2015, pp. 525-542. 6. H. Ghodosi and R. Safavi-Naini, Remarks on the multiple assignment secret sharing scheme. Proc. of ICICS 1997 - International Conference on Information and Communications Security, SpringerVerlag, pp. 72-80. 7. I. Homoliak, F. Toffalini, J. Guarnizo, Y. Elovici, and M. Ochoa, Insight into insiders and it: A survey of insider threat taxonomies, analysis, modeling, and countermeasures. ACM Computing Surveys, 52(2), 2019, pp.1-30. 8. C. Johnson, L. Badger, D. Waltermire, J. Snyder, and C. Skorupka, Guide to Cyber Threat Information Sharing. NIST Special Publication 800-150, 2016, pp. 1-43. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-150 9. A. Sanzgiri and D. Dasgupta, Classification of insider threat detection techniques. Proc. of ACM CISRC 2016 (the 11th Annual Cyber and Information Security Research Conference), 2016, pp. 1-4. 10. A. Shamir, How to share a secret. Communications of the ACM, 22(11) (1979), pp. 612-613.