Title: Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.01985v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 01:19:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation 

Shahzad Ahmad 1[0000-0002-9654-869X] , Stefan Rass 1[0000-0003-2821-2489] ,and Zahra Seyedi 2[0009-0002-8492-4640]  

> 1

LIT Secure and Correct Systems Lab, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria  

> 2

Department of Electronics, Information and Bioengineering, Polytechnic University of Milan, Milan, Italy 

shahzad.ahmad@jku.at , stefan.rass@jku.at , zahrasseyedi@gmail.com 

Abstract. We introduce Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation (PD-FHC), a framework enabling users to outsource Boolean computations to an untrusted cloud while maintaining both computa-tional privacy against honest-but-curious providers and plausible de-niability against coercive adversaries. We define the notion of a Deni-able Computation Medium (DCM) and a Deniable Computation Scheme 

(DCS) as medium-independent abstractions, then instantiate them using RGB images with Fredkin-gate circuits. Multiple computation scenarios (one real, several decoys) are embedded at secret positions within cover images; the cloud applies identical operations to every pixel, processing all scenarios uniformly. Under coercion, the user reveals a decoy compu-tation with verifiable results while the real computation remains hidden. We formalize multi-round coercion games with existence and intent dis-tinguishing advantages, proving computational privacy with advantage 

Θ(1 /(n − 1)!) and negligible existence-hiding advantage for the image instantiation. Our Python implementation, benchmarked across circuit sizes (5–289 gates) and image dimensions ( 128 2 to 512 2), demonstrates competitive performance with TFHE for Boolean circuits while provid-ing deniability that FHE fundamentally cannot offer. 

Keywords: Plausible deniability · Homomorphic computation · Steganogra-phy · Fredkin gate · Cloud computing · Privacy-preserving computation 

# 1 Introduction 

Outsourcing computation to cloud providers exposes sensitive data to untrusted infrastructure. Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) [14] and Trusted Execu-tion Environments (TEEs) [11] protect data confidentiality but fail to address a distinct threat: coercion . A powerful adversary who compels a user to explain her cloud activity will find that FHE ciphertexts confirm the use of encryption, and TEE attestation logs confirm that a specific computation was executed. Nei-ther technology allows the user to credibly deny her true computational intent.  

> arXiv:2605.01985v1 [cs.CR] 3 May 2026 2S. Ahmad et al.

This paper introduces Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation 

(PD-FHC), a framework enabling users to outsource Boolean computations while maintaining the ability to deny, under coercion, what they actually computed. 

1.1 Motivating Scenario 

Consider a journalist who uses a cloud image-processing service to apply cus-tom filters to a photo archive. The service receives batches of photographs along with a pixel-level transformation specification, applies the transformation uni-formly across every pixel, and returns the processed images. From the provider’s perspective, this is routine cloud image processing. Unknown to the provider, the journalist has embedded the inputs to a sen-sitive Boolean computation, a threshold check on a confidential value, into the least significant bits (LSBs) of specific pixels. The transformation specification is an obfuscated Boolean circuit implemented via universal Fredkin gates, applied pixel-wise. The journalist has also embedded inputs for several decoy computa-tions at other pixel positions: a brightness check, a color-balance verification, and a noise level assessment. All are processed identically by the cloud. If later co-erced to explain her cloud usage, the journalist reveals a decoy and its verifiable result. The coercer cannot distinguish the decoy from the real computation. This scenario illustrates two requirements that existing secure computation techniques fail to satisfy simultaneously: 1. Existence hiding. The act of performing a sensitive computation must be concealed within a legitimate interaction. FHE fails here: sending ciphertexts to a cloud is conspicuous, and a coercive adversary can demand decryption keys. PD-FHC embeds computation within routine image processing, making the protocol itself non-suspicious. 2. Intent deniability. Even if an adversary suspects computation occurred, the user must provide an alternative, verifiable explanation. TEEs fail here: attestation logs confirm exactly what was executed. PD-FHC supports mul-tiple parallel computations, any of which can be credibly presented as the real one. 

1.2 Design Requirements 

We identify four properties that any deniable outsourced computation scheme must satisfy: (1) uniform processability the cloud applies identical operations to every data element; (2) sufficient capacity the cover medium has far more ad-dressable positions than secret bits ( n ≫ L · ℓ); (3) distribution preservation gate operations preserve the statistical profile of non-secret positions; and (4) cover plausibility transmitting the medium to a cloud provider has a legitimate, non-suspicious purpose. We formalize these in Section 4 as properties of a Deniable Computation Medium (DCM) and present PD-FHC as both a general framework that satisfies these requirements and a concrete image-based instantiation. Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation 3

1.3 Contributions 

1. Abstract framework. We define the notion of a Deniable Computation Medium and a Deniable Computation Scheme, separating the security model from any specific cover medium (Section 4). 2. Two-phase threat model with multi-round coercion. We formalize a threat model separating computational privacy (against an honest-but-curious cloud) from plausible deniability (against a coercive adversary who may demand multiple revelations), and define novel coercion games with existence and intent distinguishing advantages (Section 5). 3. Image-based instantiation. We instantiate the framework using RGB im-ages and Fredkin-gate circuits, proving computational privacy with advan-tage Θ(1 /(n − 1)!) and bounding the coercive adversary’s advantage (Sec-tions 6–7). 4. Implementation and evaluation. We provide a Python implementation benchmarked across circuit sizes (5–289 gates) and image dimensions ( 128 2

to 512 2), with quantitative comparison against TFHE for equivalent Boolean circuits (Section 8). 

1.4 Paper Organization 

Section 2 surveys related work. Section 3 covers Fredkin gates and LSB steganog-raphy. Section 4 defines the abstract framework. Section 5 formalizes the threat model. Section 6 presents the image-based protocol. Section 7 proves security. Section 8 evaluates the implementation. Section 9 discusses limitations. Sec-tion 10 concludes. 

# 2 Related Work 

2.1 Fully Homomorphic Encryption 

Gentry’s construction [14] enabled arbitrary computation on encrypted data. Subsequent schemes [6,4,1] have improved efficiency, and modern libraries sup-port both Boolean and arithmetic circuits. However, FHE provides no mecha-nism for plausible deniability. The use of FHE is itself conspicuous: transmitting ciphertexts to a cloud provider is not normal behaviour, and a coercive adversary can demand decryption keys. PD-FHC addresses this by embedding computa-tion within a legitimate interaction whose very existence is non-suspicious. 

2.2 Trusted Execution Environments 

Hardware-based solutions such as Intel SGX [11], ARM TrustZone [23], and AMD SEV [17] provide isolated execution. Despite strong integrity guarantees, TEEs require specialized hardware, have proven vulnerable to side-channel at-tacks [2,7,8,20], and produce attestation logs that constitute undeniable proof of execution. PD-FHC is purely algorithmic and hardware-agnostic, producing no attestation trail. 4 S. Ahmad et al. 

2.3 Steganography and Homomorphic Steganography 

Classical steganography [13] conceals message existence within cover media. Ad-vanced techniques by Holub and Fridrich [16] and Pevný et al. [22] achieve high undetectability but do not support computation on embedded data. ProSt [3] introduced homomorphic steganography, enabling Fredkin-gate computation on LSB-embedded data with information-theoretic privacy against an honest-but-curious cloud. However, ProSt embeds a single computation and does not address coercion. PD-FHC extends ProSt with multi-location embedding and a formal deniability model, enabling users to provide alternative explanations under co-ercion. 

2.4 Deniable Cryptography and Storage 

Canetti et al. [9] introduced deniable encryption, allowing senders to produce fake randomness that makes ciphertexts appear to encrypt different plaintexts. Subsequent work addressed receiver deniability [18], bi-deniability [21], and ef-ficient constructions [5]. Deniable storage systems such as hidden volumes (e.g., VeraCrypt/TrueCrypt) and StegFS [19] apply deniability to file storage: hidden volumes are indistinguishable from random data in free space. PD-FHC gen-eralizes deniability from static data (messages, files) to dynamic computational intent : Alice denies not what she stored, but what she computed .

2.5 Secure Multi-Party Computation 

MPC protocols [25,15] enable joint computation with input privacy. However, MPC requires interactive protocols among multiple parties, assumes honest par-ticipation, and the use of MPC itself is conspicuous. PD-FHC operates in a non-interactive, single-cloud setting and provides deniability that MPC does not offer. 

2.6 Positioning 

Table 1 compares PD-FHC with related approaches. PD-FHC is the only scheme that simultaneously provides computational privacy, existence hiding, and intent deniability. 

# 3 Preliminaries 

3.1 Notation 

We write n for the total number of addressable bit-positions in a medium in-stance, L for the number of embedded computation scenarios (one real, L − 1

decoys), ℓ for the number of input bits per scenario, j∗ for the index of the real computation (known only to Alice), and t for the number of coercion rounds. Position sets are denoted Lj ⊂ P with Li ∩ Lj = ∅ for i̸ = j (disjoint positions ). A function ν : N → R+ is negligible if for every c > 0 there exists n0 such that 

ν(n) ≤ n−c for all n ≥ n0.Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation 5                                

> Table 1. Comparison with related work. ∗Message deniability only, not computational intent. Approach Comp. Privacy Exist. Hiding Intent Deniab. Overhead HW-Dep. FHE Yes No No V. High No TEE Yes No No Low Yes ProSt Yes Yes No Medium No Den. Enc. Yes —Yes ∗Low No MPC Yes No No High No
> PD-FHC Yes Yes Yes Med. No

3.2 LSB Steganography 

An RGB image is represented as a tensor I ∈ Zh×w×3256 , where h, w are height and width, and 3 denotes the RGB channels. We embed and extract single bits via the least significant bit: 

Emb (I, b, (r, c, k )) : I[r, c, k ] ← (I[r, c, k ] & ¬1) | b (1) 

Ext (I, (r, c, k )) : return I[r, c, k ] & 1 (2) For an h × w × 3 image, there are n = h · w · 3 possible embedding positions. Each position (r, c, k ) identifies a unique row, column, and color channel. 

3.3 Fredkin Gate 

The Fredkin gate [12] is a three-input, three-output reversible gate defined as: 

F (c, x, y ) = 

{

(c, x, y ) if c = 0 (c, y, x ) if c = 1 

where c is the control bit and x, y are data bits. 

Lemma 1 (Hamming Weight Preservation). For any (c, x, y ) ∈ { 0, 1}3, if 

(c, x ′, y ′) = F (c, x, y ), then c + x + y = c + x′ + y′.Proof. If c = 0 , then (x′, y ′) = ( x, y ) and the sum is unchanged. If c = 1 , then 

(x′, y ′) = ( y, x ) and c + y + x = c + x + y.

Why Fredkin gates. Four properties make Fredkin gates essential to PD-FHC: (1) Bit-level compatibility. Each gate operates on individual bits, directly com-patible with LSB steganography where each position carries one bit. 6 S. Ahmad et al. 

(2) Distribution preservation. Hamming weight preservation (Lemma 1) ensures that if input bits are i.i.d. Ber(1 /2) , output bits are also Ber(1 /2) . Without this, the cloud could detect computation by comparing input and output bit distributions at each position. (3) Universality. Any Boolean function can be computed using Fredkin gates with ancillary constant bits: 

NOT (x) : F (1 , x, 0) = (1 , 0, x ) = ⇒ ¬ x on wire 3 (3) 

AND (x, y ) : F (x, y, 0) = ( x, _, x ∧ y) = ⇒ x ∧ y on wire 3 (4) 

OR follows from De Morgan’s law using three gates. For example, the Boolean expression (A ∧ C) ∨ (¬A ∧ B) ∨ (¬B ∧ ¬ C) decomposes into 17 Fredkin gates: 3 for negations, 3 for conjunctions, 6 for disjunctions (via De Morgan), and 5 for wire management and ancillary routing. (4) Reversibility. F (F (c, x, y )) = ( c, x, y ), so no information is destroyed during computation, supporting correct result extraction from any embedded position. 

# 4 Framework for Deniable Outsourced Computation 

We define deniable outsourced computation as a general framework, independent of any specific cover medium. This abstraction separates the security model from the instantiation, allowing us to state security guarantees that hold for any medium satisfying our requirements. Section 6 instantiates this framework with RGB images. 

4.1 Deniable Computation Medium 

A deniable computation scheme requires a cover medium that serves two pur-poses: it provides a large space of addressable bit-positions for embedding secret computations among noise, and it supplies a legitimate context for transmitting data to a cloud provider. 

Definition 1 (Deniable Computation Medium). A Deniable Computation Medium (DCM) is a tuple M = ( D, P, n, Read , Write , G) where: 

– D is the data domain, i.e., the set of valid medium instances; 

– P is a position space with |P| = n, indexing the addressable bit-positions within any instance M ∈ D ;

– Read : D × P → { 0, 1} extracts the bit at a given position; 

– Write : D × P × { 0, 1} → D sets the bit at a given position, leaving all other positions unchanged; 

– G is a gate family. Each gate G ∈ G is a function G : {0, 1}κ → { 0, 1}κ

for some fixed arity κ. A gate is applied uniformly by evaluating G at every position p ∈ P : given κ input instances M1, . . . , M κ ∈ D , the gate produces 

κ output instances M ′

> 1

, . . . , M ′ 

> κ

such that for each p ∈ P :

(Read (M ′

> 1

, p ), . . . , Read (M ′

> κ

, p )) = G(Read (M1, p ), . . . , Read (Mκ, p )).Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation 7

The uniform application of gates is the mechanism that ensures the cloud provider treats every position identically: the same function G is evaluated at every p ∈ P ,regardless of whether p carries secret data, decoy data, or noise. 

4.2 Security Properties of a DCM 

Not every medium is suitable for deniable computation. We require four prop-erties. 

Definition 2 (Suitable DCM). A DCM M is suitable for deniable compu-tation if it satisfies the following properties: 

Property 1 (Uniform Processability). For every gate G ∈ G and every set of input instances M1, . . . , M κ, the uniform application of G transforms each posi-tion p ∈ P independently and identically. The computational cost and memory-access pattern of evaluating G are identical for every position, preventing the cloud provider from inferring which positions carry secret data through timing or cache side-channels. 

Property 2 (Sufficient Capacity). The number of addressable positions n

satisfies n ≫ L · ℓ, where L is the number of embedded computation scenarios and ℓ is the number of bit-positions required per scenario. This ensures that secret positions constitute a negligible fraction of the total, making them difficult to locate. 

Property 3 (Distribution Preservation). Let π denote a distribution over 

{0, 1} (typically π = Ber(1 /2) ). If all non-secret positions in the input in-stances carry i.i.d. bits drawn from π, then after applying any sequence of gates 

G1, . . . , G m ∈ G , the bits at non-secret positions in the output instances remain distributed according to π:

Read (M ′′  

> i

, p ) ∼ π for all non-secret p and all output instances M ′′  

> i

.

This prevents the provider from identifying positions where “structured” com-putation occurred by comparing input and output distributions. 

Property 4 (Cover Plausibility). There exists a legitimate, non-suspicious use case for transmitting instances of D to a cloud provider for processing and receiving processed instances in return. The gate specifications in G must be consistent with this use case, so that the cloud provider’s view of the protocol is indistinguishable from a routine service interaction. 

Remark. Properties 1–3 are formal and verifiable for a given instantiation. Prop-erty 4 is inherently contextual: it depends on the operational setting and cannot be captured by a cryptographic definition. We discuss how specific instantiations satisfy Property 4 qualitatively in Section 6. 8 S. Ahmad et al. 

4.3 Deniable Computation Scheme 

We now define the algorithmic structure of a deniable computation over a DCM. 

Definition 3 (Deniable Computation Scheme). A Deniable Computation Scheme (DCS) over a suitable DCM M is a tuple of algorithms: 

Π = ( LocGen , Emb , Comp , Ext )

– {L1, . . . , L L} ← LocGen (P, L, ℓ ): Samples L pairwise disjoint subsets of P,each of size ℓ, uniformly at random ( Li ∩ Lj = ∅ for i̸ = j). These position sets are known only to Alice. 

– M′ ← Emb (M, {(Lj , x j )}Lj=1 ): For each scenario j, writes input bits xj ∈{0, 1}ℓ at positions Lj . All positions p / ∈ ⋃ 

> j

Lj are filled with i.i.d. bits from 

π.

– M′′ ← Comp (C, M′): The cloud provider evaluates circuit C = ( G1, . . . , G m)

by applying each gate Gi uniformly to all positions in P. The provider receives only C and M′, with no knowledge of position sets or scenario assignments. 

– yj ← Ext (M′′ , L j ): Alice reads output bits for scenario j from positions Lj

in the computed instances. 

Correctness. A DCS is correct if for every scenario j ∈ { 1, . . . , L }, the ex-tracted output yj = Ext (M′′ , L j ) equals fj (xj ), where fj is the Boolean function computed by circuit C when evaluated on the bits at positions Lj .

Uniform processing as structural invariant. The critical constraint is that 

Comp applies every gate to every position in P. Combined with Property 3, this ensures that the output medium M′′ retains the same indistinguishability guarantees as M′: the provider cannot distinguish secret from noise positions by observing the computation. 

4.4 Possible Instantiations 

The DCM framework is not limited to images. Any medium with high-capacity bit-addressable positions and a legitimate cloud-processing use case is a candi-date: uncompressed audio (LSBs in 16-bit samples, cloud audio normalization), or network packet payloads (cloud-based traffic processing). We focus on RGB images (Section 6), where P = {(r, c, k )} indexes pixel-channel LSBs, the gate family is Fredkin gates ( κ = 3 ), and cover plausibility follows from the prevalence of cloud image processing services. 

# 5 Threat Model and Security Definitions 

We formalize the adversarial setting in which a Deniable Computation Scheme (Definition 3) operates. Our threat model separates two adversaries with distinct capabilities and goals, reflecting realistic scenarios where the entity executing a computation differs from the entity demanding explanations. Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation 9

5.1 Entities Alice (Client). Alice possesses private inputs and wishes to outsource a Boolean computation to a cloud provider. She prepares L computation scenarios (one real at secret index j∗, and L−1 decoys) using a DCS Π over a DCM M. Alice knows all position sets {L1, . . . , L L}, the index j∗, all circuit descriptions, and all inputs and outputs for every scenario. 

Carol (Cloud Provider). An honest-but-curious (HBC) adversary. Carol re-ceives embedded medium instances M′ and an obfuscated circuit Cobf , and ex-ecutes the protocol faithfully. She may attempt to infer secret information from her observations. Carol knows the DCS algorithms, the gate family G, and all public parameters. She does not know: any position sets Lj , the number of sce-narios L, the true index j∗, or which positions carry secret data versus noise. 

Eve (Coercive Adversary). A computationally unbounded adversary who can compel Alice to reveal information. Eve models legal authorities, state actors, or any entity with the power to demand explanations under threat of conse-quences. Eve can observe the complete communication transcript between Alice and Carol: V = ( M′, C obf , M′′ ). Under coercion, Eve can demand that Alice reveal computation scenarios, including their position sets, circuit descriptions, inputs, and outputs. 

Critically, Eve cannot force Alice to reveal information that Alice denies possessing. In particular, Eve does not know the total number L of embedded scenarios. After Alice reveals t scenarios and claims no further scenarios ex-ist, Eve cannot verify this claim because unrevealed positions are information-theoretically indistinguishable from noise (this is proved in Theorem 2). This is analogous to hidden-volume deniability in deniable storage systems [24]: an adversary who demands all volumes cannot prove that a hidden volume exists if the free space is filled with random data. 

5.2 Adversary Separation 

The security model relies on a separation between Carol and Eve: 

Temporal. Carol processes data during computation; Eve coerces Alice after computation completes (or at a later time). 

Capability. Carol has infrastructure access (she processes the medium) but no coercion power. Eve has coercion power but no direct access to Carol’s infras-tructure or intermediate computation states. 

Non-collusion. Carol and Eve do not share information or coordinate. We discuss collusion attacks and mitigations in Section 9. 

5.3 Security Game: Computational Privacy 

We formalize what it means for the cloud provider to learn nothing about secret data. The game is defined over the abstract DCM (Definition 1), not any specific medium. 10 S. Ahmad et al. 

Definition 4 (Computational Privacy Game). Let Π be a DCS over a DCM M with n = |P| positions. The game Game A

> priv

(n, L, ℓ ) between a challenger and adversary A (modeling Carol) proceeds as follows: 1. Setup. The challenger generates L disjoint position sets {L1, . . . , L L} ← 

LocGen (P, L, ℓ ) and embeds L scenarios with inputs {x1, . . . , x L}, producing 

M′ ← Emb (M, {(Lj , x j )}Lj=1 ). All non-secret positions carry i.i.d. bits from 

π.2. Computation. The challenger applies the obfuscated circuit Cobf uniformly, producing M′′ .3. Challenge. A receives (M′, C obf , M′′ ) and outputs a position p∗ ∈ P .4. Win condition. A wins if p∗ ∈ ⋃Lj=1 Lj .

Definition 5 (Privacy Advantage). The adversary’s advantage is: 

Adv A

> priv

(n, L, ℓ ) = Pr[ A wins ] − L · ℓn

where L · ℓ/n is the probability of hitting a secret position by random guessing. Π

provides computational privacy if this advantage is negligible in n for all efficient adversaries A.

Remark. The game captures Carol’s strongest attack: identify any secret posi-tion. A weaker variant (guess the secret value at a known position) is trivially subsumed. 

5.4 Security Game: Plausible Deniability 

We model coercion as an interactive, multi-round game where the adversary may demand repeated explanations, reflecting realistic coercion settings. 

Definition 6 (Multi-Round Coercion Game). Let Π be a DCS over a DCM 

M with n = |P| . The game Game A

> deny

(n, L, t ), parameterized by L ≥ 2 scenarios and t < L coercion rounds, proceeds as follows: 1. Setup. Alice prepares L scenarios {s1, . . . , s L} where sj = ( Cj , x j , L j , y j )

consists of a circuit, inputs, position set, and correct output yj = fj (xj ).One scenario sj∗ is Alice’s real computation. All circuits have identical gate counts (padded with dummy gates as needed). Position sets are pairwise disjoint and uniformly random. 2. Embedding & Computation. Alice embeds all scenarios and transmits the medium to Carol. Carol processes it uniformly, producing M′′ . The adversary 

A (modeling Eve) observes the full transcript V = ( M′, C obf , M′′ ).3. Coercion rounds. For i = 1 , . . . , t :(a) A demands that Alice reveal a scenario. (b) Alice reveals a decoy sji = ( Cji , x ji , L ji , y ji ) where ji̸ = j∗ and ji /∈{j1, . . . , j i−1} (a fresh, previously unrevealed decoy). Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation 11 

(c) A verifies: reads output bits from M′′ at positions Lji and checks yji =

fji (xji ).4. Claim. After t rounds, Alice claims no further scenarios exist. 5. Adversary output. A outputs a bit b′ ∈ { 0, 1} (for existence distinguishing: 

b′ = 1 if A believes unrevealed scenarios remain) or an index j′ (for intent distinguishing: A’s guess of j∗). 

Definition 7 (Deniability Advantages). We define two advantages capturing distinct threats: 

Existence distinguishing. Consider two experiments. In Exp 0, Alice embeds ex-actly t scenarios (all of which are revealed). In Exp 1, Alice embeds L > t scenarios and reveals t of them (hiding L − t, including the real one). In both experiments, all non-revealed, non-secret positions are i.i.d. from π. The existence advantage is: 

Adv A

> exist

(n, L, t ) = ∣∣Pr[ A(Exp 1) = 1] − Pr[ A(Exp 0) = 1] ∣∣ (5) Intent distinguishing. Assuming A knows L (a strictly stronger adversary), the intent advantage measures the ability to identify j∗ among the L − t unrevealed scenarios: 

Adv A

> intent

(n, L, t ) = Pr[ j′ = j∗] − 1

L − t (6) 

Π provides plausible deniability if both advantages are negligible in n for all adversaries A.

5.5 Discussion of the Coercion Model Two-dimensional deniability. The game captures two distinct threats. Exis-tence distinguishing (Eq. 5) asks whether Eve can tell apart a world where Alice has hidden scenarios from a world where all scenarios have been revealed. This is the direct analogue of hidden-volume detection in deniable storage. Intent dis-tinguishing (Eq. 6) asks whether, even if Eve somehow knows L, she can identify 

j∗ among the unrevealed scenarios. Existence hiding is strictly stronger: if Eve cannot detect hidden scenarios, she certainly cannot identify j∗ among them. 

Why t < L is necessary. If t ≥ L, Alice runs out of decoys and must either reveal the real computation or be caught in an inconsistency. This is an inherent limitation of any finite deniability scheme. Alice’s security parameter is L − t:the number of unrevealed scenarios after coercion. Increasing L provides more “budget” for deniability at the cost of additional embedding (which is cheap, since L · ℓ ≪ n for practical parameters). 

Eve does not know L. This is not an assumption of convenience; it is an information-theoretic consequence of the scheme. After Alice reveals t scenarios and claims termination, the remaining n − t · ℓ positions consist of (L − t) · ℓ

unrevealed secret positions and n − L · ℓ noise positions. Since all positions are i.i.d. under π (by Property 3 of the DCM), Eve cannot distinguish these two classes. Theorem 2 makes this precise. 12 S. Ahmad et al. 

Verification does not break deniability. In each coercion round, Eve verifies that the revealed scenario is consistent: the output at the revealed positions matches the claimed circuit and inputs. This verification always succeeds for both real and decoy scenarios (by correctness of the DCS), so passing verification provides Eve with no distinguishing information. 

Relationship to prior models. Our existence advantage Adv exist is analogous to the hidden-volume detection advantage in deniable storage [9,19]. Our in-tent advantage Adv intent is analogous to the indistinguishability advantage in deniable encryption [9]. PD-FHC combines both in a single framework for the computational (rather than storage or communication) setting. 

# 6 PD-FHC: Image-Based Instantiation 

We instantiate the abstract framework of Section 4 using RGB images as the cover medium and Fredkin gates as the gate family. 

6.1 Image-Based DCM 

We define the image-based DCM Mimg as an instance of Definition 1: 

D = Zh×w×3256 (RGB images with pixel values in {0, . . . , 255 })

P = {(r, c, k ) : 0 ≤ r < h, 0 ≤ c < w, 0 ≤ k < 3}

n = h · w · 3 (total LSB positions) 

Read (I, (r, c, k )) = I[r, c, k ] & 1 (extract LSB) 

Write (I, (r, c, k ), b ) : I[r, c, k ] ← (I[r, c, k ] & ¬1) | b (set LSB) 

G = {F } where F : {0, 1}3 → { 0, 1}3 is the Fredkin gate ( κ = 3 )We verify that Mimg satisfies the four properties of a suitable DCM (Defini-tion 2): 

Property 1 (Uniform Processability). Each Fredkin gate reads one bit from each of three input images at position p and writes one bit to each of three output images at the same position p. This is applied identically for every p ∈ P , with identical computation and memory access per position. 

Property 2 (Sufficient Capacity). Even a modest 128 × 128 image gives n =49 ,152 , supporting hundreds of scenarios with ℓ = 16 bits each while keeping 

L · ℓ/n < 1% .

Property 3 (Distribution Preservation). Fredkin gates preserve Hamming weight (Lemma 1): for uniform input bits, the output bits are also uniform. Non-secret positions initialized with i.i.d. Ber(1 /2) bits remain Ber(1 /2) after any number of Fredkin gate evaluations. 

Property 4 (Cover Plausibility). Cloud-based image processing is routine. Ser-vices such as AWS Lambda, Cloudinary, and Adobe Creative Cloud apply per-pixel transformations to image batches as a standard operation. A Fredkin-gate circuit applied pixel-wise to LSBs is syntactically identical to a custom bitwise image filter. The images transmitted are real photographs; LSB modifications are imperceptible to human vision (PSNR > 50 dB, Section 8). Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation 13 

6.2 Protocol Phases Phase 1: Location Generation (Alice). Alice runs LocGen (P, L, ℓ ) to sample 

L pairwise disjoint position sets, each of size ℓ, uniformly at random from P. She also selects L Boolean circuits C1, . . . , C L with ℓ inputs and one or more outputs. For deniability, all circuits must have identical gate counts after padding with dummy Fredkin gates operating on ancillary constants. 

Phase 2: Multi-Location Embedding (Alice). Alice embeds inputs for all 

L scenarios into a set of cover images. For each scenario j and each input bit 

xj,i (i = 1 , . . . , ℓ ), she writes xj,i at the i-th position in Lj using Write . All remaining LSB positions are filled with cryptographically random bits (using a CSPRNG). This produces embedded images M′ in which secret positions are information-theoretically indistinguishable from noise. 

Phase 3: Circuit Obfuscation (Alice). Alice obfuscates the combined circuit 

C before transmitting it to Carol: 1. Wire renaming : all wire identifiers are replaced with random strings. 2. Dummy gates : additional Fredkin gates operating on ancillary constants are inserted, increasing the apparent circuit complexity without affecting out-puts. 3. Execution order randomization : gates are permuted while respecting topo-logical dependencies. These techniques increase the practical difficulty of reverse-engineering the cir-cuit but do not provide provable function-hiding guarantees (see Section 7 for an honest treatment). PD-FHC’s formal security relies on information-theoretic position hiding and matched-complexity decoy circuits, not on circuit obfusca-tion. 

Phase 4: Uniform Computation (Carol). Carol receives the embedded im-ages M′ and the obfuscated circuit Cobf . For each gate Gi in topological order, Carol applies the Fredkin gate to every position p ∈ P : she reads three LSBs from the gate’s three input images at position p, computes (c′, x ′, y ′) = F (c, x, y ),and writes the results to three output images at the same position p. Output images from one gate serve as input images for subsequent gates. This uniform processing ensures that Carol treats all positions identically: positions carrying real secrets, decoy secrets, and noise all undergo the same transformation. Carol cannot determine which positions carry which type of data. 

Phase 5: Extraction (Alice). Alice receives the output images M′′ from Carol. For each scenario j, she reads the output bits from the designated output positions in Lj , obtaining yj = Ext (M′′ , L j ).14 S. Ahmad et al. 

Phase 6: Coercion Response (Alice). Under coercion, Alice executes the following strategy. When Eve demands revelation of a computation: 1. Alice selects a previously unrevealed decoy index ji̸ = j∗.2. Alice reveals (Cji , x ji , L ji , y ji ), providing a narrative explaining why sji was her “real” computation (e.g., “I was checking image brightness thresholds for print quality”). 3. Eve verifies: she extracts bits from M′′ at positions Lji and confirms yji =

fji (xji ). Verification always succeeds (by DCS correctness). 4. If Eve demands another revelation, Alice repeats with a fresh decoy. After exhausting her revelation budget ( t < L − 1 decoys), Alice claims no further scenarios exist. Alice should prepare narratives for all decoy scenarios before deployment and pre-commit to a revelation order to ensure consistency across rounds. 

6.3 Cover Plausibility 

The cover plausibility argument rests on three observations. First, cloud im-age processing is a multi-billion dollar industry; sending batches of images to a cloud service for per-pixel transformations is routine and non-suspicious. Second, Fredkin gates applied pixel-wise to LSBs produce output images that are visu-ally identical to the inputs: only the least significant bit of each pixel value may change, resulting in at most a ±1 shift per channel, which is imperceptible (we quantify this in Section 8 via PSNR and SSIM). Third, the obfuscated circuit specification is syntactically a sequence of three-input, three-output operations on pixel channels, which is consistent with common image filter definitions. This combination means that the entire Alice Carol interaction images in, transformation specification, processed images out is indistinguishable from a standard cloud image processing job. In contrast, this is the property that FHE fundamentally lacks: transmitting FHE ciphertexts to a cloud provider has no innocent explanation. 

# 7 Security Analysis 

We prove that PD-FHC provides (i) computational privacy against Carol (Sec-tion 7.1) and (ii) plausible deniability against Eve under multi-round coercion (Section 7.2). Results are stated over the abstract DCM and then instantiated for the image-based scheme. Full proofs are in Appendix A. 

7.1 Computational Privacy Theorem 1 (Privacy of Deniable Computation). Let Π be a DCS over a suitable DCM M (Definition 2). If all non-secret positions carry i.i.d. bits from Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation 15 

π and every gate G ∈ G preserves π (Property 3), then for any adversary A in the computational privacy game (Definition 4): 

Adv A

> priv

(n, L, ℓ ) ≤ L · ε(n)

where ε(n) is the advantage of distinguishing a single secret position from a random position in M.Proof (Proof sketch). By a union bound over the L · ℓ secret positions. Each individual secret position p ∈ Lj is embedded among n − 1 positions carrying i.i.d. bits from π. Since the gate family preserves π (Property 3), the distribution at non-secret positions is unchanged after computation. Hence the problem of identifying p reduces to the single-position hiding problem with advantage ε(n).The union bound over L · ℓ positions yields the stated bound. (Since L · ℓ ≪ n

by Property 2, and ε(n) is negligible, the product remains negligible.) Full proof in Appendix A.1. 

Corollary 1 (Image Instantiation). For the image-based DCM Mimg with 

n = h · w · 3 LSB positions and Fredkin gates: 

ε(n) = 1 − p2

> b

pb · (n − 1)! ∈ Θ

( 1(n − 1)! 

)

where pb = Pr[ S = b] for secret bit S. Consequently, 

Adv A

> priv

(n, L, ℓ ) ≤ L · Θ

( 1(n − 1)! 

)

which is negligible for any polynomial L.Proof. The single-position bound ε(n) follows from the information-hiding the-orem of ProSt [3]. The argument is: Carol observes the vector of n LSBs, where one position carries the secret bit S and all others are i.i.d. Ber( pb). The secret position is chosen uniformly at random and unknown to Carol. A Bayesian anal-ysis shows Carol’s posterior advantage over her prior is Θ(1 /(n − 1)!) , which is negligible since (n − 1)! grows super-exponentially. Fredkin gates preserve Ham-ming weight (Lemma 1), hence preserve the marginal distribution Ber(1 /2) at each position. An induction over the circuit depth shows the bound holds after any number of gate evaluations. 

Concrete security. Even for a small 128 × 128 image ( n = 49 ,152 ), the advan-tage 1/(49 ,151)! is astronomically smaller than the standard 2−128 threshold. 

7.2 Plausible Deniability 

We analyze Eve’s advantage in the multi-round coercion game (Definition 6) along two dimensions: existence distinguishing and intent distinguishing. 16 S. Ahmad et al. 

Existence Indistinguishability. Theorem 2 (Existence Hiding). In the multi-round coercion game with t

revelations out of L scenarios, the existence advantage satisfies: 

Adv A

> exist

(n, L, t ) ≤ (L − t) · ℓ · ε(n − t · ℓ)

which is negligible in n for the image instantiation. Proof (Proof sketch). After t revelations, the remaining medium has n′ = n−t·ℓ

positions. Distinguishing Exp 0 (all noise) from Exp 1 ((L − t) · ℓ secrets among noise) reduces to the privacy game on the residual medium. By Theorem 1, the advantage is at most (L − t) · ε(n′). Full proof in Appendix A.2. 

Implication. Eve cannot prove that Alice is hiding additional computations beyond what she revealed. The unrevealed secret positions are information-theoretically indistinguishable from noise. This is the computational analogue of hidden-volume deniability: just as random data on a disk is indistinguishable from a hidden encrypted volume, random LSBs in an image are indistinguishable from embedded computation inputs. 

Intent Indistinguishability. We now consider a strictly stronger adversary who knows L and must identify j∗ among the L − t unrevealed scenarios. We analyze three attack vectors. 

Theorem 3 (Intent Hiding). In the multi-round coercion game, Eve’s intent advantage satisfies: 

Adv A

> intent

(n, L, t ) ≤ δcircuit + εside 

where δcircuit bounds circuit-structure distinguishability and εside bounds side-channel leakage. Proof. We bound each attack vector separately and combine via union bound. 

Position analysis. All L position sets are sampled uniformly and independently from P. The revealed sets {Lj1 , . . . , L jt } are independent of the unrevealed sets. Hence, for any adversary attempting to identify j∗ from position information alone: 

Pr[ A(Lj1 , . . . , L jt ) identifies j∗] = 1

L − t .

Position analysis provides zero advantage over random guessing. 

Circuit analysis. Alice pads all L circuits to identical gate count m and obfuscates with wire renaming, dummy gates, and execution order randomization. Resid-ual distinguishability comes from structural differences (e.g., circuit depth). We define: 

δcircuit = max 

> i,j

|d(Ci) − d(Cj )|

max k d(Ck)

where d(C) denotes circuit depth. For carefully matched circuits, δcircuit = O(1 /m ).Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation 17 

We emphasize an important limitation: the lightweight obfuscation does not 

provide cryptographic function-hiding. An adversary who can analyze circuit semantics (e.g., determine that Cj∗ computes a medical threshold while Cj com-putes a parity check) gains additional advantage not captured by δcircuit . Alice must therefore construct decoy circuits that are semantically plausible for the claimed use case (Definition 8). Formalizing and automating semantic plausibil-ity is an open problem. 

Side-channel analysis. Under the constant-time execution model, where Carol processes all n positions sequentially for each gate layer, the execution trace T

depends only on (n, m ) and not on secret data. Formally, I(T ; j∗) = 0 , giving 

εside = 0 . In practice, residual leakage from micro-architectural effects can be bounded by 2−λ for security parameter λ.Combining via union bound gives Adv intent ≤ δcircuit + εside .

Concrete Parameters. For practical deployments: 

– m = 17 gates (small circuit): δcircuit ≤ 1/17 ≈ 0.06 , giving Eve at most ∼6% 

advantage over random guessing among unrevealed scenarios. 

– m = 81 gates (4-bit adder): δcircuit ≤ 1/81 ≈ 0.012 , giving ∼1.2% advantage. 

– m = 289 gates (8-bit multiplier): δcircuit ≤ 1/289 ≈ 0.003 , giving ∼0.3% 

advantage. These bounds improve as circuit complexity grows. Alice can further reduce 

δcircuit by adding dummy gates or selecting circuits with naturally similar struc-tures. 

7.3 Decoy Plausibility 

The formal bounds above assume that decoy scenarios cannot be distinguished on semantic grounds. We make this requirement explicit. 

Definition 8 ( ε-Plausible Decoy). A decoy scenario (Cj , x j , y j ) is ε-plausible with respect to a context Γ (describing Alice’s claimed activity) if:(i) Cj computes a function semantically consistent with Γ ; (ii) the inputs xj are drawn from a distribution consistent with Γ ; and (iii) Pr[ Eve identifies j as decoy | Γ ] ≤

1/L + ε.

Example. If Alice claims to run image-quality checks on a photo archive, plau-sible decoys include brightness threshold checks, color balance verification, and noise level assessment. An implausible decoy would compute a cryptographic hash function with no image-processing interpretation. 

Limitation. Constructing semantically plausible decoys requires domain knowl-edge. Automating this process is an open problem and a direction for future work. 18 S. Ahmad et al. 

7.4 Computational Exchangeability 

The security of PD-FHC rests on a symmetry property we call computational exchangeability .

Proposition 1 (Exchangeability). Let y = ( y1, . . . , y L) denote the output bit-vectors at the L secret position sets after circuit evaluation. For any permutation 

σ of scenario indices: 

∣∣Pr[ A(y) = 1] − Pr[ A(σ(y)) = 1] ∣∣ ≤ negl (n)

for any efficient adversary A.Proof (Proof sketch). Each yj results from circuit evaluation on inputs xj em-bedded at uniformly random positions Lj , processed uniformly alongside i.i.d. noise. Since position sets are independent uniform samples of disjoint subsets, processing is position-independent, and non-secret bits are computationally in-distinguishable from random after Fredkin transformations (by Lemma 1), the joint distribution of outputs is invariant under permutation of scenario indices up to negligible distinguishing advantage. Full proof in Appendix A.3. Exchangeability means there is no “privileged” real scenario that stands out from decoys based on observable computation artifacts. All L scenarios are equivalent from Eve’s viewpoint. 

# 8 Implementation and Evaluation 

8.1 Implementation 

We implemented PD-FHC in Python (approximately 1,250 lines) using NumPy for vectorized operations and Pillow for image handling. The implementation separates Alice (client: embedding, obfuscation, extraction) from Carol (cloud: uniform gate evaluation), maintaining proper security boundaries. The critical optimization is vectorized Fredkin-gate evaluation: NumPy broadcasting applies each gate to all n pixel positions simultaneously, yielding approximately 258 ×

speedup over a naïve loop implementation. Source code is available at https: //anonymous.4open.science/r/PD-FHC-4D88/ .

8.2 Experimental Setup Hardware. HP EliteBook 840 G8 with Intel Core i5-1135G7 (2.4 GHz, 4 cores / 8 threads), 16 GB RAM, Windows 11. 

Methodology. All measurements averaged over 100 runs. We report mean ±

standard deviation. All benchmarks are single-threaded. 

Circuits. – Threshold-3 : x > k for 3-bit values (5 Fredkin gates, ℓ = 3 )Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation 19                                                             

> Table 2. End-to-end PD-FHC latency ( L= 4 scenarios). Communication = images transmitted ×image size. Circuit Gates Image Compute Total Comm. (ms) (ms) (MB) Threshold 5128 22.62 4.23 0.9 Small 14 128 26.19 9.42 2.2 Small 14 256 221.76 33.31 8.8 4-bit Add 88 128 239.13 59.27 12.8 4-bit Add 88 256 2161.26 230.54 51.4 8-bit Mult 302 256 2453.74 663.54 173.2
> Table 3. PD-FHC vs. TFHE for Boolean circuits. PD-FHC: 256 2image, L= 4 . TFHE: published gate latency [10]. Circuit Gates PD-FHC TFHE Speedup (ms) (ms) Threshold 52.62 ≈65 24.8 ×
> Small 14 21.76 ≈182 8.4 ×
> 4-bit Add 88 161.26 ≈1,144 7.1 ×
> 8-bit Mult 302 453.74 ≈3,926 8.7 ×

– Small : (A ∧ C) ∨ (¬A ∧ B) ∨ (¬B ∧ ¬ C) (17 gates, ℓ = 3 )

– 4-bit Adder : full addition of two 4-bit values (81 gates, ℓ = 8 )

– 8-bit Multiplier : full 8-bit multiplication (289 gates, ℓ = 16 )

Configurations. Image sizes: 128 2 × 3 (n = 49 ,152 ), 256 2 × 3 (n = 196 ,608 ), 

512 2 × 3 (n = 786 ,432 ). Scenario counts: L ∈ { 2, 4, 8}.

8.3 End-to-End Performance 

Table 2 reports the end-to-end latency breakdown for L = 4 scenarios. Key observations: computation time scales linearly with gate count and linearly with pixel count ( h · w). Multi-location overhead is minimal ( < 15% between 

L = 2 and L = 8 ) because all locations are processed in the same pixel-wise pass. Communication overhead is dominated by the number of images: each gate requires input and output images, yielding 2m images for an m-gate circuit. 

8.4 Comparison with TFHE 

To contextualize PD-FHC’s performance, we compare against TFHE [10], a state-of-the-art FHE library optimized for Boolean circuit evaluation. TFHE evaluates bootstrapped Boolean gates in approximately 13 ms per gate on com-parable hardware [10]. 

Caveat. This comparison is limited to Boolean circuits. TFHE provides seman-tic security under standard lattice assumptions and supports arbitrary Boolean 20 S. Ahmad et al. 

computations without requiring a cover medium. PD-FHC trades generality for cover plausibility and deniability. The comparison demonstrates that PD-FHC’s additional security properties come at comparable or lower computational cost for Boolean circuits of moderate size. 

8.5 Image Quality 

LSB modifications are imperceptible. For a 256 × 256 cover image with all LSBs randomized (worst case), the Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio is PSNR ≈ 51 .1 dB and the Structural Similarity Index is SSIM > 0.99 . These values confirm that stego-images are visually identical to the originals, supporting the cover plausibility argument of Section 6.3. 

8.6 Concrete Use Case: Medical Threshold Check 

We illustrate an end-to-end deployment. Alice wants to determine whether her medical test result (8-bit value v) exceeds a diagnostic threshold (8-bit value τ ), without the cloud learning either value. 

Setup. Alice prepares L = 4 scenarios: the real 8-bit comparator ( v > τ ?) and three decoy circuits of matched complexity (pixel brightness check, color balance verification, noise-level assessment). Each circuit requires ≈120 Fredkin gates with ℓ = 16 input bits. Image size: 256 × 256 × 3 (n = 196 ,608 ). 

Resources. Total secret positions: L·ℓ = 64 out of n = 196 ,608 (0.03%). Images transmitted: 2 × 120 = 240 . Total data: ≈ 47 MB. Computation time: 220 ms. 

Under coercion. Eve demands an explanation. Alice reveals Decoy 1: “I was checking whether average pixel brightness exceeds a print-quality threshold.” She provides the position set, circuit, inputs (a brightness value and threshold), and output. Eve verifies correctness. Eve cannot determine whether this was the real computation or a decoy, because all four scenarios produce correct, verifiable results at their respective positions. 

8.7 Security Parameters 

Even for the smallest image tested ( 128 ×128 ), Carol’s advantage ε(n) = Θ(1 /(49 ,151)!) 

is astronomically smaller than 2−128 . For Eve, with L = 4 scenarios and t = 1 

revelation, existence hiding ensures that the remaining 3 unrevealed scenarios (48 bits) are indistinguishable among 196 ,592 noise positions. 

# 9 Discussion 

Collusion. If Carol and Eve collude, the phase separation (Section 5.2) breaks. Carol could log intermediate computation states or process positions non-uniformly, enabling Eve to correlate side-channel data with revealed scenarios. Mitigations Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation 21 

include generating fresh random positions for each execution (preventing cross-session correlation), distributing computation across multiple non-colluding providers, and employing verifiable computation to detect non-uniform processing. These add complexity and are complementary to PD-FHC’s core guarantees. 

Limitations. (1) PD-FHC supports Boolean circuits only; extending to arith-metic circuits is future work. (2) Storage overhead is significant: each gate re-quires input and output images, yielding O(m · h · w) total storage. Image reuse via graph-coloring techniques can reduce this. (3) Circuit obfuscation provides defense-in-depth but not provable function-hiding (Section 7). Formal indistin-guishability obfuscation would strengthen the guarantee but is impractical with current techniques. (4) Decoy plausibility requires manual construction of seman-tically appropriate decoy circuits. Automating this is an open problem. (5) Secu-rity holds for single executions. Reusing positions across sessions enables correla-tion attacks; fresh randomization per session mitigates this. (6) Alice must trust that Carol executes the circuit correctly. Unlike FHE with verification or TEEs with attestation, PD-FHC provides no mechanism to detect incorrect execution without revealing secret positions. 

# 10 Conclusion 

We introduced PD-FHC, the first framework for deniable outsourced computa-tion. By defining the notion of a Deniable Computation Medium and formalizing multi-round coercion games with both existence and intent distinguishing advan-tages, we established a foundation for provable deniability in cloud computing. Our image-based instantiation achieves computational privacy with advantage 

Θ(1 /(n − 1)!) against an honest-but-curious cloud provider and provides plau-sible deniability against coercive adversaries who may demand multiple revela-tions. The implementation demonstrates competitive performance with TFHE for Boolean circuits while providing deniability that FHE fundamentally cannot. 

Future work. Key directions include GPU acceleration for large-scale cir-cuits (projected 10–50 × speedup), automated decoy circuit generation, formal function-hiding obfuscation, extension to arithmetic circuits, integration with ORAM for collusion resistance, and analysis of security against quantum adver-saries. 

# References     

> 1. Microsoft SEAL: Fast and Easy-to-Use Homomorphic Encryption Library, https: //www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/project/microsoft-seal/
> 2. Aciiçmez, O., Koç, c.K., Seifert, J.P.: On the power of simple branch prediction analysis (2007), https://doi.org/10.1145/1229285.1266999
> 3. Ahmad, S., Rass, S.: Prost: Provably secure homomorphic steganography. IEEE Access pp. 1–1 (2026). https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3656995
> 4. Badawi, A.A., Alexandru, A., Bates, J., Bergamaschi, F., et al.: OpenFHE: Open-source fully homomorphic encryption library. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2022/915 (2022), https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/915

22 S. Ahmad et al. 5. Bellare, M., Hoang, V.T.: Succinctly-Committing Authenticated Encryption (2024), https://eprint.iacr.org/2024/875 , publication info: A major revision of an IACR publication in CRYPTO 2024 6. Brakerski, Z., Vaikuntanathan, V.: Efficient Fully Homomorphic Encryption from (Standard) LWE (2011), https://eprint.iacr.org/2011/344 , publication info: Published elsewhere. Unknown where it was published 7. Brasser, F., Müller, U., Dmitrienko, A., Kostiainen, K., Capkun, S., Sadeghi, A.R.: Software grand exposure: SGX cache attacks are practical (Aug 2017), https://www.usenix.org/conference/woot17/workshop-program/ presentation/brasser 

8. Bulck, J.V., Minkin, M., Weisse, O., Genkin, D., et al.: Foreshadow: Extract-ing the keys to the intel SGX kingdom with transient Out-of-Order execution p. 991–1008 (Aug 2018), https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity18/ presentation/bulck 

9. Canetti, R., Dwork, C., Naor, M., Ostrovsky, R.: Deniable encryption. In: Kaliski, B. (ed.) ADVANCES IN CRYPTOLOGY - CRYPTO’97, PROCEEDINGS. LNCS, vol. 1294, pp. 90–104 (1997) 10. Chillotti, I., Gama, N., Georgieva, M., Izabachène, M.: TFHE: Fast Fully Ho-momorphic Encryption Over the Torus. Journal of Cryptology 33 (1), 34–91 (Jan 2020), https://doi.org/10.1007/s00145-019-09319-x 

11. Costan, V., Devadas, S.: Intel SGX Explained (2016), https://eprint.iacr.org/ 2016/086 , publication info: Preprint. 12. Fredkin, E., Toffoli, T.: Conservative Logic. In: Adamatzky, A. (ed.) Collision-Based Computing, pp. 47–81. Springer, London (2002). https://doi.org/10. 1007/978-1-4471-0129-1_3 , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-0129-1_3 

13. Fridrich, J.: Steganography in digital media: Principles, algorithms, and applica-tions. Cambridge University Press, USA (2009) 14. Gentry, C.: Fully homomorphic encryption using ideal lattices (2009). 

https://doi.org/10.1145/1536414.1536440 , https://www.semanticscholar. org/paper/6e6e67042c647b8dd6818f893cbe1ffd474636a3 

15. Goldreich, O., Micali, S., Wigderson, A.: How to play any mental game. Proceed-ings of the nineteenth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing (1987), 

https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:6669082 

16. Holub, V., Fridrich, J.: Designing steganographic distortion using directional fil-ters. In: 2012 IEEE International Workshop on Information Forensics and Se-curity (WIFS). pp. 234–239. IEEE, Costa Adeje - Tenerife, Spain (Dec 2012). 

https://doi.org/10.1109/WIFS.2012.6412655 , http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ document/6412655/ 

17. Kaplan, D.: AMD x86 Memory Encryption Technologies (2016), https: //www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity16/technical-sessions/ presentation/kaplan 

18. Klonowski, M., Kubiak, P., Kutyłowski, M.: Practical Deniable Encryption. In: Geffert, V., Karhumäki, J., Bertoni, A., Preneel, B., Návrat, P., Bieliková, M. (eds.) SOFSEM 2008: Theory and Practice of Computer Science, vol. 4910, pp. 599–609. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2008), http://link.springer. com/10.1007/978-3-540-77566-9_52 , series Title: Lecture Notes in Computer Science 19. McDonald, A., Kuhn, M.: StegFS: A steganographic file system for Linux. In: Pfitzmann, A. (ed.) INFORMATION HIDING, PROCEEDINGS. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1768, pp. 463–477 (2000) Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation 23 20. Moghimi, D., Bulck, J.V., Heninger, N., Piessens, F., Sunar, B.: Copy-Cat: Controlled Instruction-Level attacks on enclaves pp. 469–486 (Aug 2020), https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity20/presentation/ moghimi-copycat 

21. O’Neill, A., Peikert, C., Waters, B.: Bi-Deniable Public-Key Encryption. In: Rog-away, P. (ed.) ADVANCES IN CRYPTOLOGY - CRYPTO 2011. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6841, pp. 525–542. Int Assoc Cryptol Res; Univ Calif Santa Barbara, Comp Sci Dept; IEEE Comp Soc Tech Comm Secur & Privacy (2011) 22. Pevný, T., Filler, T., Bas, P.: Using High-Dimensional Image Models to Perform Highly Undetectable Steganography. In: Böhme, R., Fong, P.W.L., Safavi-Naini, R. (eds.) Information Hiding. pp. 161–177. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2010). 

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-16435-4_13 

23. Sabt, M., Achemlal, M., Bouabdallah, A.: Trusted execution environment: What it is, and what it is not. 2015 IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ISPA 1, 57–64 (2015), 

https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:195917113 

24. TrueCrypt Foundation: Truecrypt (2004–2014), https://www.truecrypt.org/ ,software 25. Yao, A.C.C.: Protocols for secure computations. 23rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (sfcs 1982) pp. 160–164 (1982), https://api. semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:62613325 

# A Full Proofs 

This appendix provides complete proofs for the theorems stated in Section 7. 

A.1 Proof of Theorem 1 (Privacy of Deniable Computation) 

Proof. We reduce the multi-location privacy game to the single-position hiding problem via a hybrid argument and union bound. 

Setup. Consider the computational privacy game (Definition 4). The challenger embeds L scenarios with ℓ bits each at pairwise disjoint, uniformly random position sets L1, . . . , L L ⊂ P , with all remaining positions carrying i.i.d. bits from π. The adversary A receives (M′, C obf , M′′ ) and outputs a position p∗ ∈ P .

Hybrid games. Define a sequence of hybrid experiments Hyb 0, Hyb 1, . . . , Hyb L·ℓ.In Hyb 0, no positions carry secrets (all n positions are i.i.d. from π). In Hyb k,the first k secret positions (in some canonical ordering of ⋃ 

> j

Lj ) carry their true secret values, and the remaining L · ℓ − k positions that would carry secrets instead carry i.i.d. bits from π. Hyb L·ℓ is the real experiment. 

Single-step indistinguishability. For any consecutive pair (Hyb k−1, Hyb k),the only difference is the value at a single position pk: in Hyb k−1 it carries a random bit from π; in Hyb k it carries the secret bit sk. Since sk is itself a deterministic value embedded among n − 1 positions carrying i.i.d. π-bits, and the position pk is chosen uniformly at random and unknown to A, this reduces to the single-position hiding problem. By assumption, the distinguishing advantage for a single position is ε(n).24 S. Ahmad et al. 

Distribution preservation under computation. After circuit evaluation, each gate G ∈ G preserves π at non-secret positions (Property 3 of Definition 2). For the image instantiation, this follows from Hamming weight preservation (Lemma 1): the Fredkin gate F (c, x, y ) = ( c, x ′, y ′) satisfies c+x+y = c+x′ +y′,so if the input triple (c, x, y ) at a non-secret position consists of i.i.d. Ber(1 /2) 

bits, the output triple (c, x ′, y ′) has the same marginal distribution. Formally, for any b ∈ { 0, 1}:

Pr[ x′ = b] = Pr[ c = 0] · Pr[ x = b] + Pr[ c = 1] · Pr[ y = b] = 12 · 12 + 12 · 12 = 12 .

By induction over the circuit depth d, after applying m gates in sequence, each non-secret position retains Ber(1 /2) marginals, so the single-position hiding ad-vantage ε(n) applies to the post-computation medium as well. 

Union bound. By the triangle inequality applied to the hybrid chain: 

Adv A

> priv

(n, L, ℓ ) = ∣∣Pr[ A wins in Hyb L·ℓ] − Pr[ A wins in Hyb 0]∣∣

≤

> L·ℓ

∑

> k=1

∣∣Pr[ A wins in Hyb k] − Pr[ A wins in Hyb k−1]∣∣

≤ L · ℓ · ε(n).

Since ε(n) is negligible (by assumption on the DCM) and L · ℓ is polynomial in 

n (by Property 2), the product L · ℓ · ε(n) is negligible. In the theorem statement we write L · ε(n) as a simplified upper bound absorbing the constant ℓ.

Instantiation. For the image-based DCM, the single-position advantage is derived from the ProSt information-hiding theorem [3]. The secret bit S is placed at an unknown position among n − 1 i.i.d. Ber( pb) decoy bits via a uniformly random permutation π. The adversary observes the resulting vec-tor M = ( M0, . . . , M n−1) and attempts to compute Pr[ S = b | M = m]. By Bayesian analysis: 

Pr[ S = b | M = m] = Pr[ S = b, M 0 = b]Pr[ M0 = b] = 

> 1(n−1)!

+

(

1 − 1(n−1)! 

)

p2

> b

pb

The advantage | Pr[ S = b | M ]−Pr[ S = b]| evaluates to 1−p2 

> b
> pb·(n−1)!

∈ Θ(1 /(n−1)!) .Since (n − 1)! grows super-exponentially, this is negligible for any n ≥ 2.

A.2 Proof of Theorem 2 (Existence Hiding) 

Proof. We show that after t coercion rounds, the remaining medium is indistin-guishable from a purely random medium from Eve’s perspective. 

Post-revelation state. After t revelations, Eve knows: 

– The revealed position sets {Lj1 , . . . , L jt } and their contents. 

– The communication transcript V .Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation 25 

Eve’s view of the remaining n′ = n − t · ℓ positions is the residual medium M′′ 

> res

obtained by excluding the t · ℓ revealed positions. 

Experiment construction. We construct two experiments matching Defini-tion 7: In Exp 0: M′′  

> res

contains n′ positions, all carrying i.i.d. bits from π (no hidden scenarios exist). In Exp 1: M′′  

> res

contains n′ positions, of which (L − t) · ℓ carry unrevealed secrets at uniformly random positions, and the rest carry i.i.d. bits from π.

Independence of revealed and unrevealed positions. The position sets 

L1, . . . , L L are sampled as L pairwise disjoint subsets of P, each chosen uniformly at random. Given the revealed sets {Lj1 , . . . , L jt }, the conditional distribution of the unrevealed sets {Lj : j / ∈ { j1, . . . , j t}} is uniform over all (L − t)-tuples of pairwise disjoint ℓ-subsets of P \ ⋃ti=1 Lji . In particular, no information about unrevealed positions is leaked by revealed positions, because the position sam-pling is independent. 

Reduction to privacy game. Distinguishing Exp 0 from Exp 1 is exactly the computational privacy game (Definition 4) played on a medium of reduced size 

n′ = n − t · ℓ with L′ = L − t embedded scenarios. By Theorem 1: 

Adv A

> exist

(n, L, t ) ≤ (L − t) · ℓ · ε(n′)

where ε(n′) = Θ(1 /(n′ − 1)!) for the image instantiation. Since t · ℓ ≪ n for practical parameters ( t · ℓ ≤ a few hundred, while n ≥ 49 ,152 ), we have n′ is close to n and the advantage remains negligible. 

Concrete bound. For n = 196 ,608 (a 256 × 256 image), L = 4 , t = 1 , ℓ = 16 :

n′ = 196 ,592 and the advantage is bounded by 3 · 16 · Θ(1 /(196 ,591)!) ≈ 0, which is astronomically smaller than any computationally relevant threshold. 

A.3 Proof of Proposition 1 (Exchangeability) 

Proof. We prove that the joint distribution of output vectors (y1, . . . , y L) is invariant under permutation of scenario indices, up to negligible distinguishing advantage. 

Setup. Let σ be an arbitrary permutation of {1, . . . , L }. We must show that for any efficient adversary A:

∣∣Pr[ A(y1, . . . , y L) = 1] − Pr[ A(yσ(1) , . . . , y σ(L)) = 1] ∣∣ ≤ negl (n).

Position symmetry. Each position set Lj is a uniformly random ℓ-subset of 

P, sampled independently (subject to disjointness). The gate family applies the same function G at every position in P. Therefore, the joint distribution of 

(Read (M′′ , p )) p∈Lj depends only on the input bits (xj, 1, . . . , x j,ℓ ) embedded at positions Lj and on the noise bits at all other positions. Since noise bits are i.i.d. from π and gates preserve π (Lemma 1, Property 3), the noise contribution is identically distributed regardless of which scenario occupies which positions. 26 S. Ahmad et al. 

Input independence. Each scenario j has its own input vector xj embedded at its own position set Lj . Because positions are disjoint and gates operate position-wise (the output at position p depends only on inputs at p across the κ input images), the output yj is determined by xj and the noise at positions Lj . There is no cross-scenario interference: the computation at positions Lj1 does not affect the computation at positions Lj2 for j1̸ = j2.

Permutation invariance. Suppose we permute scenario labels so that the in-puts (x1, . . . , x L) at positions (L1, . . . , L L) become (xσ(1) , . . . , x σ(L)) at positions 

(Lσ(1) , . . . , L σ(L)). Since all position sets are drawn from the same uniform dis-tribution, the pair (Lj , x j ) has the same marginal distribution as (Lσ(j), x σ(j)).The output yj at position set Lj with input xj has the same distribution as yσ(j)

at position set Lσ(j) with input xσ(j).To distinguish (y1, . . . , y L) from (yσ(1) , . . . , y σ(L)), the adversary would need to link a specific output vector to a specific position set. But the position sets are unknown to the adversary (they are secret), and the outputs themselves are embedded among noise that is indistinguishable from the secret bits (by Theo-rem 1 with advantage ε(n) = Θ(1 /(n−1)!) ). Hence the adversary’s distinguishing advantage is at most L · ε(n) = negl (n).

A.4 Detailed Hamming Weight Preservation Under Circuit Composition 

We prove that Hamming weight preservation holds through arbitrary circuit compositions, not just single gates. 

Lemma 2 (Hamming Weight Under Composition). Let C = ( G1, . . . , G m)

be a circuit of m Fredkin gates. For any position p ∈ P , let bin (p) denote the vector of all input bits read from position p across all input images, and bout (p)

denote the vector of all output bits written to position p across all output images. Then: 

wt (bout (p)) = wt (bin (p)) 

where wt (·) denotes Hamming weight. Proof. We proceed by induction on the circuit depth d.

Base case ( d = 1 ). A single Fredkin gate G1 reads (c, x, y ) from position p across three input images and writes (c′, x ′, y ′) to three output images. By Lemma 1, 

c + x + y = c′ + x′ + y′, so the Hamming weight is preserved. 

Inductive step. Suppose the claim holds for circuits of depth d − 1. At depth 

d, the gate Gd reads its inputs from output images of previous gates. At position 

p, these intermediate images carry bits whose total Hamming weight equals the initial input weight (by the inductive hypothesis). Gate Gd permutes its three input bits (conditionally swapping the data pair) without changing the sum. Hence the total Hamming weight at p across all images at depth d equals the total at depth d − 1, which equals the initial weight. Plausible Deniability in Fully Homomorphic Computation 27 

Consequence for distribution preservation. If the initial input bits at a non-secret position p are i.i.d. Ber(1 /2) , then the joint distribution of bits at 

p after the full circuit is a permutation of the original bits (by reversibility of Fredkin gates). Since any permutation of i.i.d. Bernoulli random variables has the same marginal distribution, each output bit at p remains Ber(1 /2) . This is precisely Property 3 of the DCM, confirming that the image instantiation satisfies distribution preservation for circuits of arbitrary depth.