Title: VOW: Verifiable and Oblivious Watermark Detection for Large Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.27666v1

Published Time: Fri, 01 May 2026 00:46:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# VOW: Verifiable and Oblivious Watermark Detection for Large Language Models 

# Xiaokun Luan 

luanxiaokun@pku.edu.cn Peking University Beijing, China 

# Yihao Zhang 

zhangyihao@stu.pku.edu.cn Peking University Beijing, China 

# Pengcheng Su 

pcs@pku.edu.cn Peking University Beijing, China 

# Feiran Lei 

2200010603@stu.pku.edu.cn Peking University Beijing, China 

# Meng Sun ∗

sunm@pku.edu.cn Peking University Beijing, China 

## Abstract 

Large Language Model (LLM) watermarking is crucial for establish-ing the provenance of machine-generated text, but most existing methods rely on a centralized trust model. This model forces users to reveal potentially sensitive text to a provider for detection and offers no way to verify the integrity of the result. While asymmet-ric schemes have been proposed to address these issues, they are either impractical for short texts or lack formal guarantees linking watermark insertion and detection. We propose VOW, a new pro-tocol that achieves both privacy-preserving and cryptographically verifiable watermark detection with high efficiency. Our approach formulates detection as a secure two-party computation problem, instantiating the watermark’s core logic with a Verifiable Obliv-ious Pseudorandom Function (VOPRF). This allows the user and provider to perform detection without the user’s text being revealed, while the provider’s result is verifiable. Our comprehensive eval-uation shows that VOW is practical for short texts and provides a crucial reassessment of watermark robustness against modern paraphrasing attacks. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Security and privacy → Privacy-preserving protocols ; • Com-puting methodologies → Natural language generation .

## Keywords 

Large Language Models, Privacy-preserving Watermarking, Verifi-able Oblivious PRF, Accountability 

## 1 Introduction 

The widespread adoption of large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-4 [ 35 ] and Llama [ 34 ] is changing how information is created and disseminated. While these language models demonstrate im-mense potential in various applications, their deployment raises questions regarding the provenance and accountability of gener-ated content. On the one hand, the capabilities of LLMs can be misused to generate harmful content at scale, ranging from disin-formation campaigns [ 41 ] and sophisticated fraud [ 30 ] to academic dishonesty and training data contamination [ 40 ]. On the other hand, the opaque nature of LLM APIs creates opportunities for service providers to engage in model downgrading [ 25 ]. In this scenario, 

> ∗Corresponding author.

users are unknowingly served outputs from inferior models, vio-lating service-level agreements (SLAs). In response, governments worldwide are establishing regulatory frameworks, such as the U.S. White House Executive Order 14110 [ 42 ] and the EU AI Act [ 14 ], while major technology companies are also deploying solutions like Google’s SynthID [ 11 ]. This trend underscores the urgent need for practical solutions to attribute content to its origin for effective accountability. Generative watermarking is a promising technique to address these challenges by embedding a hidden signal directly into the generated content. While the concept applies to various modalities, its most prominent development has been in text, pioneered by Kirchenbauer et al. [ 26 ]. Their approach, often called the Green-Red scheme (or KGW scheme), is model-agnostic and works by modifying the model’s output logits. Specifically, it partitions the vocabulary into a favored “green list” and a disfavored “red list” based on a secret key at each generation step. By encouraging the model to sample tokens from the green list, a statistical signal is embedded into the text. The watermark can be detected later using the same secret key to identify machine-generated content. Following this foundational work, subsequent research has pri-marily optimized watermarking for misuse tracing, where the goal is to attribute harmful content (e.g., disinformation) back to specific models or malicious users [ 32 , 48 ]. In this adversarial setting, the model provider embeds watermarks to track users who may at-tempt to erase these signals. Consequently, technical advancements have largely centered on enhancing robustness against removal attacks, leading to significant developments in semantic water-marking methods [ 22 , 23 , 38 ] designed to survive paraphrasing and rewriting. However, the opaque nature of Model-as-a-Service (MaaS) in-troduces a critical but distinct scenario: service auditing. Here, an honest user (or a third-party auditor) seeks to verify the prove-nance of an API response to ensure it originates from the claimed premium model, thereby detecting potential model downgrading and SLA violations. This auditing context imposes a different set of requirements compared to misuse tracing. Since the text is typi-cally held by the user and remains intact, robustness is secondary. Instead, the priority shifts to privacy and verifiability. Privacy is essential because auditing often occurs in multi-provider environ-ments, and sending sensitive query data (e.g., proprietary code) to a potential imposter poses severe security risks. Verifiability is also 

> arXiv:2604.27666v1 [cs.CR] 30 Apr 2026 Xiaokun Luan, Yihao Zhang, Pengcheng Su, Feiran Lei, and Meng Sun

important because a provider, motivated by profit to downgrade models, cannot be fully trusted to report detection results honestly. Without reliable proof, a malicious provider could simply lie about the detection outcome to conceal SLA violations. Existing watermarking schemes struggle to meet these auditing requirements with practical constraints. Symmetric watermarking schemes (like the Green-Red scheme) share the same secret key for insertion and detection. This forces users to disclose plaintext to the provider for detecting a watermark, making blind audit-ing impossible and compromising data privacy. Furthermore, the detection result lacks verifiability, leaving users with no way to challenge a provider’s dishonesty. Conversely, asymmetric (public-key) schemes [ 7 , 15 ] allow for local detection using a public key, theoretically addressing both privacy and verifiability. However, these methods typically require long text sequences (often hundreds of tokens) to embed sufficient cryptographic payloads, rendering them impractical for common short-output tasks such as code com-pletion, summarization, or conversational turns. Although some learning-based approaches [31] offer public verifiability, they lack formal guarantees regarding the consistency between insertion and detection networks. There is, therefore, an urgent need for a protocol that enables verifiable detection on private, short texts without exposing sensitive user inputs. In this paper, we propose VOW, a new protocol for Verifiable and Oblivious Watermarking that achieves privacy, verifiability, and practical efficiency, even on short texts. The core of our design is to reformulate watermark detection as a secure two-party compu-tation (2PC) problem, instantiating the underlying pseudorandom function with a Verifiable Oblivious Pseudorandom Function (VO-PRF) [ 12 , 13 ]. This protocol resolves the auditing dilemma for keyed watermarks: it allows the user and the provider to cooperatively compute the detection result without revealing the user’s text, while the provider’s result is cryptographically verifiable. To ensure its practicality, we develop a suite of engineering optimizations de-signed for efficient watermark insertion and detection. In summary, our main contributions are threefold: (1) We design and implement VOW, a protocol that achieves cryp-tographically verifiable and privacy-preserving watermark de-tection while remaining practical for short-text applications. (2) We formalize the threat model for trust-minimized watermark-ing, considering both malicious providers and users. We analyze the security of VOW, grounding its properties in standard cryp-tographic assumptions. (3) We conduct a thorough evaluation of VOW’s performance. Our evaluation against a capable, modern paraphrasing model re-veals that the robustness of all evaluated watermarks, including VOW, has been overestimated, providing a critical recalibration for the field. 

## 2 Preliminaries 

This section introduces notation for language models and the core cryptographic primitive, the Verifiable Oblivious Pseudorandom Function (VOPRF), that underpins our work. 

## 2.1 Language Model Notation 

We consider an autoregressive language model over a vocabulary 

V = {𝑤 1, . . . , 𝑤 𝑁 } of size 𝑁 . During text generation, for a given sequence of tokens (𝑡 1, . . . , 𝑡 𝑛 ) ∈ V 𝑛 , the model outputs logit scores 

𝑙 ∈ R𝑁 for the next token 𝑡 𝑛 +1, where 𝑙 𝑖 corresponds to the 𝑖 -th token 𝑤 𝑖 ∈ V . These logits are transformed into a probability distribution 𝑝 ∈ Δ𝑁 via the softmax function. The next token 𝑡 𝑛 +1

is then sampled from this distribution 𝑝 . While standard generation uses multinomial sampling directly over 𝑝 , practical deployments often employ truncation strategies such as top-k and top-p (nucleus) sampling to improve generation quality by restricting the sampling to a subset of the vocabulary. 

## 2.2 Verifiable Oblivious Pseudorandom Function 

An Oblivious Pseudorandom Function (OPRF) is a two-party proto-col between a server holding a Pseudorandom Function (PRF) key 

𝑘 and a client holding an input 𝑥 . The protocol allows the client to learn the PRF output F ( 𝑘, 𝑥 ) without revealing 𝑥 to the server, while the server learns nothing about the output [ 4]. A Verifiable OPRF (VOPRF) extends this notion by enabling the client to verify that the server evaluated the PRF with a specific, committed key. This is typically achieved by having the server generate a proof of correct evaluation [ 13 ]. Due to its obliviousness and verifiabil-ity, VOPRF has become a ubiquitous primitive in cryptographic protocols, especially in privacy-preserving applications. 

Definition 1. A VOPRF is a tuple of algorithms with an output length ℓ (𝜆 ):

• Setup (𝜆 ) → ( sk , pk ): A key generation algorithm run by the server to produce a secret key sk and a public key pk , where 

𝜆 is the security parameter. 

• Evaluate (sk , 𝑥 ) → 𝑦 : A deterministic server-side algorithm to compute the PRF output 𝑦 ∈ { 0, 1}ℓ for an input 𝑥 .

• The interactive oblivious evaluation protocol consists of: 

– Blind (𝑥 ) → ( ˜𝑥, 𝑟 ): A client-side algorithm to produce a blinded input ˜𝑥 and a blinding factor 𝑟 .

– BlindEvaluate (sk , ˜𝑥 ) → ( ˜𝑦, 𝜋 ): A server-side algorithm to compute a blinded output ˜𝑦 and an evaluation proof 

𝜋 .

– Finalize (𝑥, ˜𝑦, 𝑟 ) → 𝑦 : A client-side algorithm to com-pute the final output 𝑦 ∈ { 0, 1}ℓ .

• Verify (pk , 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝜋 ) → { 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑝𝑡, 𝑅𝑒 𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 }: A public algorithm to verify the correctness of an evaluation. 

A secure VOPRF must satisfy several properties, including obliv-iousness and verifiability, which our security analysis in Section 5 relies upon. In this work, we instantiate the VOPRF primitive using the 2HashDH construction [ 24 ] from RFC 9497 [ 12 ]. Furthermore, the VOPRF construction we use supports efficient batch process-ing, a feature we leverage to significantly improve performance, as detailed in Section 4. 

## 3 Threat Model and Security Definitions 

This section establishes the threat model for our text watermark-ing scheme. We first formalize the watermarking framework, then VOW: Verifiable and Oblivious Watermark Detection for Large Language Models 

analyze threats from both malicious providers and malicious users, and finally specify the security properties our scheme must satisfy. 

## 3.1 Text Watermarking Framework 

Text watermarking modifies the text generation process to embed imperceptible statistical patterns into generated content, enabling post-hoc provenance tracking. A text watermarking scheme is for-mally defined as a tuple of algorithms: 

Π = (KeyGen , Watermark , Detect ),

The key generation algorithm KeyGen (1𝜆 ) generates a secret water-marking key wk and public parameters pk given security parameter 

𝜆 . The watermarking algorithm Watermark (wk , prompt ) takes the secret key and a prompt to generate watermarked text 𝑇 by modi-fying the LLM’s token sampling process. The detection algorithm 

Detect (wk ,𝑇 ) takes the watermarking key and a text 𝑇 to output a binary decision indicating whether 𝑇 contains the watermark. The watermarking system enables critical use cases for LLM service auditing and accountability. When potentially harmful, mis-leading, or disputed content is discovered, stakeholders can use the detection service to verify whether it originated from a spe-cific provider’s model, thereby establishing responsibility. Content creators can also verify the provenance of their AI-assisted work for compliance or attribution purposes. These applications require reliable detection while protecting the privacy of users who submit texts for verification. The practical deployment involves two parties with potentially conflicting interests: the Model Provider , who owns the LLM and operates the detection service, and the User , who submits texts for verification. The Provider generates (wk , pk ), embeds watermarks into generated texts, and controls the detection service. The User queries this service to verify text provenance. In our scheme, Detect 

is implemented as an interactive protocol between the User (Client 

C) and the Provider (Server S), where the Server possesses wk 

and the Client submits candidate text for verification. Throughout this analysis, we assume adversaries are computationally bounded (probabilistic polynomial-time). 

## 3.2 Threat 1: Malicious Provider 

We consider a malicious provider S∗ who controls the detection service. The provider is modeled as semi-honest during watermark generation but potentially malicious during detection. Specifically, we assume the provider correctly executes Watermark using the committed key wk , because correct watermark insertion is nec-essary for the provenance service they operate. However, during detection, the provider may deviate from the protocol in two ways. First, they may falsify detection results, such as reporting false neg-atives to evade accountability for harmful content or false positives to incorrectly attribute third-party text to their service. Second, they may compromise user privacy by learning sensitive informa-tion from submitted texts, such as proprietary code or confidential documents. To counter this, our scheme must satisfy the following properties. 

Property 1: Privacy. The protocol must ensure that the provider learns nothing about the user’s input text beyond its length. For-mally, we require computational indistinguishability of the server’s view. That is, for any two distinct user inputs 𝑇 0,𝑇 1 of the same length, the view of the malicious server S∗ during the execution of Detect with 𝑇 0 is computationally indistinguishable from its view with 𝑇 1. This guarantees that the protocol execution leaks no information about the input content beyond its length. 

Property 2: Verifiability. Verifiability ensures that a malicious provider cannot forge a detection result. Let 𝑦 be the true output of Detect on input text 𝑇 . We require that for any malicious server 

S∗, the probability of generating a valid proof that convinces the honest client C to accept a false result 𝑦 ′ ≠ 𝑦 is negligible in 𝜆 .

## 3.3 Threat 2: Malicious User 

A malicious user C∗ aims to undermine the utility of the watermark. The adversary does not possess the secret key wk but has oracle access to the detection service ODetect (·) . Due to the verifiability of our protocol, this oracle provides reliable ground-truth detection results, which the adversary may exploit. 

Property 3: Computational unforgeability. We focus on preventing watermark forgery. A text 𝑇 ∗ is considered forged if an adversary constructs it without knowledge of wk while it is classified as wa-termarked, i.e., passes the detection threshold. We require that the probability of a computationally bounded adversary success-fully outputting a forged text 𝑇 ∗ is at most negligibly higher than the probability of a random text naturally satisfying the detection threshold. 

Remark on robustness. While unforgeability is our primary cryp-tographic guarantee, we also consider robustness, i.e., the difficulty of removing a watermark while preserving semantic meaning. We treat robustness as an empirical property rather than a formal definition, as semantic preservation is difficult to formalize math-ematically. We evaluate the scheme’s robustness against removal attacks experimentally in Section 6.3. 

## 4 Methodology 

In this section, we detail our protocol for verifiable and oblivious watermarking. Our scheme, which we call VOW, operates within the established Green-Red watermarking scheme. It fundamentally redesigns the cryptographic core and color determination logic to eliminate the need for a trusted Provider. 

## 4.1 The Green-Red Watermarking Scheme 

The Green-Red scheme, introduced by the seminal KGW method [ 26 ], is a prominent approach to watermarking texts generated by LLMs. The core idea is to pseudorandomly partition the vocabulary V

into a “green list” 𝐺 and a “red list” 𝑅 for each token generation step. The partition for generating the next token 𝑡 𝑘 is determined based on a preceding context 𝑐 = (𝑡 𝑘 −ℎ, . . . , 𝑡 𝑘 −1) with ℎ tokens and a PRF keyed by a secret watermarking key wk .The logits of tokens in this green list are then increased by a bias 

𝛿 > 0 to encourage their selection: 

˜𝑙 𝑖 =

(

𝑙 𝑖 + 𝛿, if 𝑤 𝑖 ∈ 𝐺, 𝑙 𝑖 , otherwise. (1) Xiaokun Luan, Yihao Zhang, Pengcheng Su, Feiran Lei, and Meng Sun 

Watermark detection involves re-computing the color of each token in a given text and performing a statistical test to check for a sig-nificant number of green tokens. The returned 𝑝 -value quantifies the likelihood of observing such a distribution in unwatermarked text. The secret key wk is used to determine the color of each token during both insertion and detection. 

## 4.2 Our Watermarking Protocol: VOW 

VOW builds upon the general Green-Red scheme but introduces fundamental design changes to enable verifiability and privacy. We define the color determination logic as a direct point function eval-uation based on a cryptographic predicate IsGreen . This predicate utilizes a keyed PRF F : K × X → { 0, 1}ℓ bound to the secret watermarking key wk . Specifically, we interpret the PRF output as a real number in the unit interval to determine the token’s color: 

IsGreen wk (𝑐, 𝑡 ) ⇔ Int (F ( wk , 𝑐 ∥𝑡 )) 

2ℓ < 𝛾, (2) where Int (·) interprets the ℓ-bit output string as an unsigned integer, 

∥ denotes concatenation, and 𝛾 ∈ ( 0, 1) defines the green token ratio. Conceptually, the green list 𝐺 of VOW is then defined as the set of all tokens 𝑡 for which IsGreen wk (𝑐, 𝑡 ) evaluates to true. Specifically, we instantiate the PRF F with a Verifiable Oblivious Pseudorandom Function (VOPRF) [ 12 , 24 ]. This design directly provides the security properties we need: the obliviousness property of the VOPRF protocol ensures the user’s text (the context 𝑐 and the token 𝑡 ) remains private from the provider during the interactive detection process, while the verifiability of its output, guaranteed by a cryptographic proof, ensures the integrity of the detection result. We build our three-phased watermarking protocol (setup, insertion, and detection) upon this core predicate. 

4.2.1 Setup phase. The Provider runs the Setup (𝜆 ) algorithm of the VOPRF scheme to generate a secret key sk and a corresponding public key pk . The secret key sk is kept confidential by the Provider and serves as the watermarking key wk . The public key pk is made publicly available to verify VOPRF evaluations during detection. 

4.2.2 Watermark insertion. Watermark insertion is carried out lo-cally by the Provider during text generation. For a given context 

𝑐 = (𝑡 1, . . . , 𝑡 ℎ ), the Provider modifies the logits 𝑙 for all candidate tokens 𝑤 𝑖 ∈ V based on the IsGreen predicate. Specifically, for each candidate token 𝑤 𝑖 , the Provider computes 𝑦 𝑖 = Evaluate (wk , 𝑐 ∥𝑤 𝑖 )

and modifies the corresponding logit: 

˜𝑙 𝑖 = 𝑙 𝑖 + 𝛿 · 𝟙 (Int (𝑦 𝑖 )/ 2ℓ < 𝛾 ), (3) with 𝟙 being the indicator function. This is a local evaluation and thus does not require blinding inputs or generating evaluation proofs. The next token 𝑡 ℎ+1 is then sampled from the modified logits ˜𝑙 according to a sampling strategy. We discuss optimizations to avoid iterating over the entire vocabulary during the sampling process in Section 4.4. 

4.2.3 Watermark detection. The detection phase is an interactive protocol between a User (client) and the Provider (server) to verify whether a given text 𝑇 contains a watermark. For each context-token pair (𝑐 𝑖 , 𝑡 𝑖 ) in the text 𝑇 , the protocol executes the following three steps: (1) Client-side blinding : The User constructs the input 𝑥 𝑖 =

𝑐 𝑖 ∥𝑡 𝑖 and runs ( ˜𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑖 ) = Blind (𝑥 𝑖 ) to compute a blinded input ˜𝑥 𝑖 and a secret blinding factor 𝑟 𝑖 . The User sends all blinded inputs { ˜𝑥 1, . . . , ˜𝑥 𝑛 } to the Provider. (2) Server-side evaluation : For each received input ˜𝑥 𝑖 , the Provider runs ( ˜𝑦 𝑖 , 𝜋 𝑖 ) = BlindEvaluate (wk , ˜𝑥 𝑖 ) to compute the blinded output ˜𝑦 𝑖 and the corresponding proof 𝜋 𝑖 . The Provider returns all pairs {( ˜𝑦 1, 𝜋 1), . . . , ( ˜𝑦 𝑛 , 𝜋 𝑛 )} to the User. (3) Client-side verification : For each pair, the User computes the final output 𝑦 𝑖 = Finalize (𝑥 𝑖 , ˜𝑦 𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑖 ) and verifies its cor-rectness by checking if Verify (pk , 𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑦 𝑖 , 𝜋 𝑖 ) returns 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑝𝑡 .If any proof is invalid, the protocol aborts. After successfully verifying all proofs, the User proceeds with the statistical test to check for the presence of a watermark. First, the User deduplicates the context-token pairs (𝑐 𝑖 , 𝑡 𝑖 ), resulting in a set of unique ℎ + 1-grams. This deduplication step enhances the theoretical guarantees of the detection accuracy, as pointed out by Fernandez et al. [ 17 ]. In practice, this can be done before blinding the inputs to reduce computational and communication costs, so we assume in the following that the 𝑛 pairs are unique. The User then counts the number of green tokens, 𝑔 , i.e., the number of unique 

ℎ + 1-grams satisfying Int (𝑦 𝑖 )/ 2ℓ < 𝛾 . The final step is to perform a one-sided exact Binomial test with the following hypotheses: 

• Null Hypothesis (𝐻 0): The text is not watermarked. The number of green tokens follows a Binomial distribution with parameters 𝑛 and 𝛾 .

• Alternative Hypothesis (𝐻 1): The text is watermarked. The true proportion of green tokens is greater than 𝛾 .The 𝑝 -value for an observation of 𝑔 green tokens is the probability of observing a result at least as extreme: 

𝑝 -value (𝑔 ) = Pr (𝑋 ≥ 𝑔 | 𝐻 0) = 𝐼 𝛾 (𝑔, 𝑛 − 𝑔 + 1), (4) where 𝑋 is the random variable representing the number of ob-served green tokens, and 𝐼 𝑥 (𝑎, 𝑏 ) is the regularized incomplete beta function. 

## 4.3 Design Rationale 

The design of our VOPRF-based protocol is guided by two funda-mental principles aimed at achieving cryptographic feasibility and practical efficiency. The first principle is the adoption of a direct point function evaluation paradigm, a deliberate departure from the pseudoran-dom permutation-based green list generation of the KGW scheme. Specifically, the KGW scheme determines a token’s color based on its ID’s rank in a pseudorandom permutation of the vocabulary. This permutation is generated using the PRF output as a seed. For instance, a token 𝑤 𝑗 is considered green if its ID 𝑗 is among the first 

𝛾 𝑁 entries of this pseudorandom permutation. Adapting this to a privacy-preserving setting necessitates a protocol for oblivious set membership testing. While cryptographic primitives like Private Set Intersection (PSI) [ 28 ] exist for this task, they incur significant computational and communication overhead for large vocabularies, rendering them impractical for efficient watermarking. Our design bypasses this bottleneck by framing color determination as a di-rect PRF evaluation on the point 𝑐 ∥𝑡 , thus avoiding the costly set membership test. VOW: Verifiable and Oblivious Watermark Detection for Large Language Models 

The second principle is the choice of a specialized cryptographic primitive (VOPRF) over more general-purpose tools. The problem of verifiable and oblivious watermark detection could theoretically be solved using generic constructions like zero-knowledge proofs (ZKPs) [ 18 ] or general-purpose multi-party computation (MPC) [ 45 ]protocols. However, these techniques would introduce substantial performance overhead in terms of computational complexity and communication costs, making them unsuitable for practical water-marking applications. In contrast, a VOPRF is a specialized primitive designed specifically for the task of verifiable and oblivious PRF evaluation. It offers both the security properties we require and the efficiency needed for real-world deployment. We believe such design choices are crucial for the practical viability of our water-marking scheme. The per-token evaluation logic enables verifiability and privacy-preserving watermark detection, but also introduces a performance consideration. This is because each token’s color must be deter-mined independently, which implies a potential computational overhead during watermark insertion. This apparent trade-off be-tween security and performance is not a limitation but rather a challenge that we address with a suite of optimizations, which we detail in the following section. 

## 4.4 Practical Optimizations 

To ensure our watermarking scheme is not only secure but also practical for real-world deployment, we introduce a suite of opti-mizations for both the insertion and detection phases. 

4.4.1 Efficient and Unbiased Sampling. Applying the IsGreen pred-icate to each candidate token in the vocabulary during the gen-eration process can be computationally prohibitive, especially for large vocabularies. For example, if evaluating the IsGreen predicate takes 1 microsecond per call, iterating over a vocabulary of 150,000 tokens would require 150 milliseconds per generation step. This would limit the maximum generation speed to approximately 6–7 tokens per second. Optimization techniques like pre-computation or caching are infeasible due to the dynamic, context-dependent nature of the green-list 𝐺 . The high computational overhead could render the watermarking process impractical in real-time applica-tions. The SelfHash variant of the KGW scheme also faces this chal-lenge. To mitigate this, it employs a heuristic to evaluate only a small, fixed set of tokens with the highest logits (e.g., the top 40 in [ 26 ]). However, such truncation is an ad-hoc approximation that introduces sampling bias, as it provides no guarantee that the true watermarked distribution is preserved. To address the limitations in terms of computational overhead and sampling bias, we propose a suite of optimizations that enable correct and efficient sampling, including two key techniques: rejec-tion sampling for unbiased multinomial sampling and accelerated top-k filtering using an adaptive sieve with an early exit. 

Unbiased Multinomial Sampling. Let 𝑝 (𝑡 ) denote the original probability of a token 𝑡 derived from the model’s logits, and 𝑞 (𝑡 )

be the target probability distribution after applying the watermark bias 𝛿 . These distributions are related by the following equation: 

𝑞 (𝑡 ) ∝ 

(

𝑝 (𝑡 ) · exp (𝛿 ), if 𝑡 ∈ 𝐺, 𝑝 (𝑡 ), otherwise. (5) To sample from 𝑞 (𝑡 ) without iterating the whole vocabulary, we employ rejection sampling using the original distribution 𝑝 (𝑡 ) as the proposal distribution. The sampling procedure is defined as follows: (1) Sample a candidate token 𝑡 from the original distribution 

𝑝 (𝑡 ).(2) Check its status with the IsGreen predicate. If 𝑡 ∈ 𝐺 , accept it. Otherwise, accept it with probability exp (− 𝛿 ).(3) If 𝑡 is rejected, repeat from step 1. This iterative process guarantees that the accepted samples strictly follow the target distribution 𝑞 (𝑡 ). A proof is provided in Appen-dix A. The efficiency of this algorithm depends on the overall ac-ceptance rate. Let 𝛾 = Í𝑡 ∈𝐺 𝑝 (𝑡 ) be the probability mass of green tokens in the original distribution. The expected number of trials required to generate one token is 1/Pr (accept ), which simplifies to exp (𝛿 )  

> 1+( exp (𝛿 ) − 1)𝛾

. For typical values such as 𝛿 = 2.5 and 𝛾 = 0.5,this yields an average of approximately 1.85 trials per token. Com-pared to iterating through an entire vocabulary of 150,000 tokens, this represents a reduction of over four orders of magnitude in evaluations. 

Accelerated Top-K Filtering. While rejection sampling is ideal for multinomial sampling, it is not directly applicable to top-k sam-pling, a common technique for improving generation quality. We introduce a two-stage filtering strategy for unbiased and efficient top-k sampling. First, we establish a guaranteed candidate set , 𝐶 𝑘 , by setting an adaptive cutoff logit 𝑐 = 𝑙 𝑘 -th − 𝛿 , where 𝑙 𝑘 -th is the logit of the 

𝑘 -th ranked token in the original distribution. We only need to consider tokens 𝑤 𝑗 with logits 𝑙 𝑗 ≥ 𝑐 . This is because any token 

𝑤 𝑗 with 𝑙 𝑗 < 𝑐 cannot possibly enter the new top-k set, even with the maximum bias 𝛿 applied. This adaptive filtering guarantees correctness, unlike fixed-size heuristics. Our evaluation shows that 

|𝐶 𝑘 | grows linearly with 𝑘 , with a coefficient typically ranging from 2 to 15 depending on the watermark parameter 𝛿 (detailed results in Appendix H). Second, we devise an early exit mechanism to avoid evaluating all tokens in 𝐶 𝑘 . We iterate through the candidates in 𝐶 𝑘 in descending order of their original logits, maintaining a min-heap of the top 

𝑘 watermarked scores found so far. After processing a token 𝑤 𝑗 ,we compare the heap’s minimum logit, ˜𝑙 min , with the original logit of the next candidate, 𝑙 𝑗 ′ . If the condition ˜𝑙 min ≥ 𝑙 𝑗 ′ + 𝛿 is met, no subsequent candidate can possibly enter the top-k set. We can therefore terminate the process immediately. This trick reduces the average number of IsGreen calls to approximately 2𝑘 , offering a significant speedup over evaluating the full candidate set. 

4.4.2 Efficient watermark detection. The primary communication bottleneck during detection is the overhead associated with the VOPRF protocol. A naive implementation would require generating proofs for each input context-token pair, incurring linear commu-nication costs for the proofs. Xiaokun Luan, Yihao Zhang, Pengcheng Su, Feiran Lei, and Meng Sun 

To overcome this, we leverage the batching feature of our chosen VOPRF construction (RFC 9497) [ 12 ]. This allows the Provider to process an unbounded number of blinded inputs ˜𝑥 𝑖 and generate a single, constant-size proof 𝜋 that validates all of them simultane-ously [ 13 ]. This reduces the proof-related communication overhead from being linear in the number of tokens, O( 𝑛 ), to being constant, 

O( 1), making the verification of long texts efficient. 

## 5 Security Analysis 

This section provides an analysis of our proposed watermarking scheme’s security properties, focusing on the goals laid out in Sec-tion 3. We analyze how the scheme achieves verifiability and privacy against a malicious Provider, ensures unforgeability against a mali-cious User, and finally, we discuss its robustness against removal attacks. 

## 5.1 Verifiability and Privacy 

The properties of verifiability and privacy are directly inherited from the underlying VOPRF cryptographic primitive. Verifiability ensures that a malicious Provider cannot forge a valid proof for an incorrect evaluation. In VOW, the Provider is required to return a non-interactive DLEQ proof (based on the Chaum–Pedersen protocol [ 5]) attesting that the VOPRF evaluation was computed using the committed secret key wk . The soundness of this proof system guarantees that a computationally bounded Provider cannot generate a valid proof for a fraudulent evaluation without solving the Discrete Logarithm Problem (DLP) in the un-derlying cryptographic group. Consequently, any deviation from the specified evaluation process implies that the Verify algorithm will reject the proof with overwhelming probability, allowing the User to detect the fraud. Privacy requires that the Provider’s view be computationally indistinguishable for different user inputs. This is guaranteed by the VOPRF’s obliviousness property. Before transmission, the User maps the input 𝑐 ∥𝑡 to a group element 𝑥 and computes the blinded element 𝑥 𝑟 using a uniformly random scalar 𝑟 . Since 𝑥 is a non-identity group element (with overwhelming probability) and 𝑟 is uniformly distributed, 𝑥 𝑟 is uniformly distributed in the group. This renders the blinded element statistically independent of the input, which implies the required computational indistinguishability. 

## 5.2 Unforgeability 

The proposed VOPRF-based watermarking scheme provides the User with a verified PRF evaluation result for each context-token pair (𝑐, 𝑡 ). This fine-grained feedback is essential for verifiability but also creates the powerful green-token detection oracle in our threat model that a malicious User could exploit to forge watermarked text. In this section, we analyze the security implications and establish the unforgeability of our proposed scheme. The security of the VOPRF protocol is based on the Decisional Diffie–Hellman (DDH) assumption [ 2], which ensures its underly-ing pseudorandom function is computationally indistinguishable from a truly random function. Consequently, an adversary cannot generalize from observing input-output pairs. They cannot learn any underlying pattern to predict whether an unqueried, fresh input 

(𝑐 ′, 𝑡 ′) is green or not. This effectively neutralizes any model-based or generalization attack, forcing the adversary to resort to a brute-force learning attack: they must query the oracle for a massive number of inputs and store the results in a cache. The goal of such a learning attack is to generate a forged text that mimics the statistical properties of a genuinely watermarked text, thereby deceiving our detector. The User performs an exact Bi-nomial test on a text of length 𝐿 to determine if its green-token pro-portion is statistically higher than the baseline rate 𝛾 . The attacker’s objective is to generate a text of length 𝐿 that yields a 𝑝 -value be-low the significance level 𝛼 (e.g., 10 −5), thus achieving a successful forgery with high probability. To accomplish this, the attacker must build a cache of 𝑚 pre-queried green context-token pairs to achieve a target cache hit rate of 𝑝 hit during text generation. When a cache hit occurs, the attacker can insert a green token. When a cache miss occurs (with probability 1 − 𝑝 hit ), a token is sampled normally and has a 𝛾 chance of being green. This strategy results in an effective green-token proportion of 𝑝 attack = 𝑝 hit + ( 1 − 𝑝 hit )𝛾 .We can quantify the minimum hit rate 𝑝 hit required for a suc-cessful attack. For the sake of analysis, we approximate the Bino-mial distribution with a normal distribution, which is reasonable for the relatively long text lengths an attacker would target and simplifies the derivation. To achieve a 𝑝 -value less than 𝛼 , the generated green-token proportion 𝑝 attack must exceed a threshold 

𝑝 required ≈ 𝛾 + 𝑍 𝛼 √︁ 𝛾 (1 − 𝛾 )/ 𝐿 , where 𝑍 𝛼 is the 𝑧 -score of 𝛼 . From this, we derive the required cache hit rate: 

𝑝 hit ≥ 𝑝 required − 𝛾 

1 − 𝛾 = 𝑍 𝛼 √︂ 𝛾 𝐿 (1 − 𝛾 ) . (6) For a long text of 𝐿 = 300 tokens, under a strict significance level of 𝛼 = 10 −5 (𝑍 𝛼 ≈ 4.265 ) and our default watermark parameters 

𝛾 = 0.5 and ℎ = 4, an attacker must achieve a cache hit rate of 

𝑝 hit > 24 .62% .While a naive estimate 𝑝 hit ≈ 𝑚 /|V | ℎ , based on a uniform con-text distribution, would suggest an astronomically high cost, such an assumption is overly pessimistic from the attacker’s perspective. A more realistic adversary would exploit the fact that natural lan-guage n-grams follow a highly skewed Zipfian distribution, and would preferentially cache the most frequent contexts to maxi-mize their hit rate. Using this Zipfian model, the cache rate can be expressed as a function of the number of cached n-grams. In particular, assuming the attacker stores the 𝑚 zipf most frequent n-grams, the required cache size to achieve the target hit rate 𝑝 hit 

can be estimated analytically. For completeness, we briefly outline this estimation below and defer the full derivation to Appendix B. Using empirically supported parameters for English 4-gram dis-tributions, achieving the target hit rate in our setting requires caching approximately 𝑚 zipf ≈ 9.7 × 10 10 unique 4-grams, cor-responding to at least 1.9 terabytes of storage. This storage cost, however, represents only the entry fee for the attack. First, our storage estimate is a very conservative lower bound, as a practical attack would necessitate storing a list of viable green tokens for each cached context. Second, acquiring these 97 billion samples re-quires querying the oracle at scale, incurring significant monetary costs (e.g., API fees) and time costs constrained by network latency and service rate limits. Most critically, this quantitative analysis still rests on an attacker-optimistic assumption: that a cache hit can always be used to insert VOW: Verifiable and Oblivious Watermark Detection for Large Language Models 

a green token. This completely ignores the constraint of semantic coherence. In practice, the token provided by the cache may be grammatically or semantically nonsensical in the attacker’s desired output. Inserting such tokens degrades the text’s quality and coher-ence, making the manipulation readily apparent. This forces the attacker into an inescapable dilemma: either prioritize the statistical signal by using as many cache hits as possible, thereby corrupt-ing the semantic quality of the forgery; or prioritize quality by selectively ignoring semantically poor cache hits, which inevitably lowers the effective green rate and renders the attack statistically ineffective within any reasonable text length. Therefore, the unforgeability of our scheme is ensured by a multi-layered defense. The cryptographic hardness of the VOPRF prevents predictive attacks, while the practical cost of a learning attack is rendered infeasible by the immense collection and storage costs. Finally, any attempt to overcome these cost barriers is thwarted by the fundamental trade-off between statistical detectability and semantic integrity. Our unforgeability analysis, which hinges on a sufficiently large context length ℎ, can be extended to formalize the security of the KGW scheme, a topic not addressed in its original proposal (see Appendix B for a detailed discussion). 

## 5.3 Robustness against Removal Attacks 

Finally, we discuss VOW’s robustness against watermark removal attacks, which was defined as an empirical property in our threat model but warrants discussion. Our scheme, by design, is brittle to modifications. The IsGreen 

predicate’s output depends on the exact sequence of ℎ + 1 tokens. A single edit, such as deleting a word or replacing it with a synonym, will alter the input to the PRF, resulting in a new, unpredictable output that is highly likely to disrupt the watermark signal. This property, termed “attack amplification” in [ 26 ], highlights a fun-damental trade-off between unforgeability and robustness in this class of watermarking schemes. To achieve high unforgeability, we require a large ℎ to create a vast context space. However, a large ℎ

also amplifies the impact of small edits, making the watermark less robust. While the KGW authors suggested a smaller ℎ to improve robustness, our work prioritizes the novel goals of verifiability and strong unforgeability. We thus acknowledge that the robustness of our scheme is comparable to the baseline KGW scheme, and defer the development of advanced removal defenses to future work. A quantitative evaluation of the watermark’s resilience to common perturbations is presented in Section 6.3. 

## 6 Evaluation 

We conduct a comprehensive evaluation to assess the performance, practical viability, and security of our proposed watermarking scheme, VOW. Our evaluation is structured across four key aspects: the trade-off between detectability and text quality (Section 6.2), robustness against common removal attacks (Section 6.3), practical overhead (Section 6.4), and resilience against learning-based forgery attacks (Section 6.5). Finally, we provide a quantitative comparison summary (Section 6.6). 

## 6.1 Experimental Setup 

Baseline and Watermark Parameter Setting. We compare VOW against five representative baseline watermarking schemes: 

• LeftHash & SelfHash (KGW) [ 27 ]: These schemes represent the foundational logit-based watermarking paradigm. LeftHash uses only one preceding token as the context ( ℎ = 1) to partition the vocabulary, while SelfHash uses four preceding tokens ( ℎ = 4)as the context and includes the candidate token itself in the PRF’s input to determine the candidate token’s color. 

• RDF [ 29 ]: A robust, distortion-free watermarking scheme. Its detection mechanism is probabilistic and computationally expen-sive, necessitating evaluation on a reduced number of samples. For clarity, we use a dashed line for RDF in all figures to denote its distinct evaluation conditions. 

• PDW [ 15 ]: A publicly detectable watermarking scheme that embeds a cryptographic signature into the text. Its mechanism requires more than 500 tokens to embed the signature; thus, it is intended for long texts. 

• UPV [31 ]: A learning-based publicly verifiable watermarking scheme. It uses two neural networks for vocabulary partitioning and public detection, respectively. We follow the recommended setting for each baseline method in our evaluation. For our scheme, VOW, we use a default parameter setting with ℎ = 4, 𝛾 = 0.5, and 𝛿 = 2.5. This setting is obtained based on a grid search over the watermark parameters, and details are provided in Appendix C. 

Datasets and Models. We use Qwen2.5-3B [ 36 ] to generate texts for evaluating detection performance. Text quality is measured us-ing Qwen2.5-7B [ 36 ] to compute perplexity. Following prior work, we use the C4 dataset [ 37 ] as the source of prompts for open-ended generation. For robustness evaluation, we use the ELI5 dataset [ 16 ]and the instruction-tuned Llama 3.1-8B model to generate longer responses. Further details on data preparation are provided in Ap-pendix D. 

## 6.2 Detectability vs. Quality 

We evaluate the core performance of our scheme by answering three key questions: (1) How efficiently can the watermark be detected? (2) What is the trade-off between detectability and quality? (3) How does the watermark impact the model’s utility on complex downstream tasks? 

6.2.1 Detectability on Short Texts. A practical watermark must be reliably detectable in short texts. We evaluate this by measuring the True Positive Rate (TPR) at a stringent, fixed False Positive Rate (FPR) of 10 −5 as the number of tokens increases. All methods are evaluated on 500 watermarked samples, with detection thresholds set to achieve the target FPR of 10 −5. For VOW, this corresponds to the 𝑝 -value threshold derived from the Binomial test as described in Section 4.2. Figure 1 shows the results, where we use a dashed line for RDF to highlight that it is evaluated under a relaxed FPR of 

10 −2 due to its high computational cost. Under these strict conditions, VOW is highly competitive, per-forming on par with LeftHash and slightly better than SelfHash. The TPR of VOW reaches 0.946 at 75 tokens (approx. 50–60 words) Xiaokun Luan, Yihao Zhang, Pengcheng Su, Feiran Lei, and Meng Sun 0 50 100 150 200 

Number of Tokens 

> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> True Positive Rate
> VOW
> LeftHash
> SelfHash
> RDF
> UPV

Figure 1: True positive rate (TPR) of different watermarking schemes at varying token lengths. The detection threshold is set to achieve a fixed theoretical FPR of 10 −5 (for RDF, FPR is set to 10 −2). 0 1    

> 0
> 1
> Cumulative Density
> LeftHash
> 01
> SelfHash
> 01
> VOW
> 01
> RDF
> Observed p-value

Figure 2: Calibration of 𝑝 -values on non-watermarked sam-ples. The dashed diagonal line represents the ideal uniform distribution under the null hypothesis. 

and 0.992 at 150 tokens, confirming its suitability for short texts. While RDF’s curve rises faster, this is achieved at a relaxed FPR of 

10 −2 (1000 times less strict than other methods) on only 200 samples versus 500 for others. Notably, RDF’s TPR drops from 0.925 to 0.88 as tokens increase from 80 to 200. This counterintuitive decrease, where longer texts yield lower TPR, is inconsistent with statistical theory and suggests instability in its probabilistic permutation test, which may produce unreliable results as sample size varies. UPV’s curve also rises quickly, demonstrating strong performance on short texts. However, its detection mechanism is neural network-based and does not provide formal FPR guarantees. We measured an em-pirical FPR of approximately 0.17% for UPV (detailed in Appendix F), which is substantially higher than the stringent 10 −5 threshold used for other methods. PDW requires more than 500 tokens to embed a complete cryptographic signature and thus is not designed for short-text scenarios. We tested PDW on longer texts ( 1000 tokens) and observed 97.40% TPR, though it also lacks formal FPR control. These comparisons highlight VOW’s advantages: it achieves strong detectability on short texts while maintaining rigorous, verifiable FPR guarantees critical for deployment. The validity of watermark detection relies on the alignment between theoretical and empirical FPRs. To verify this, we col-lected detection statistics on a subset of C4 dataset with 100 000 non-watermarked samples (except for RDF, where we use 20 000 samples due to computational constraints). Under the null hypoth-esis, a statistically valid detector should yield 𝑝 -values that follow 5.5 6.0 6.5 

Perplexity (better → )         

> 97
> 98
> 99
> 100
> True positive rate
> γ= 0.5
> δ= 2.0
> γ= 0.5
> δ= 2.5 γ= 0.5
> δ= 3.0
> γ= 0.625
> δ= 2.5
> VOW
> LeftHash
> SelfHash
> VOW
> LeftHash
> SelfHash

Figure 3: Trade-off between true positive rate (at 10 −5 FPR) and perplexity (PPL) for different watermarking schemes. Red dashed line represents PPL of non-watermarked texts. Table 1: Impact of watermarking on downstream task per-formance: accuracy (%) on GSM8K (4-shot) and pass@1 (%) on HumanEval (0-shot).                       

> Method GSM8K (4-shot) HumanEval (0-shot)
> No watermark 81.12 54.88 VOW ( 𝛿 =2.5)76.04 50.00 VOW ( 𝛿 =2.0)77.94 53.66 LeftHash 75.59 45.73 SelfHash 74.37 46.95 RDF 2.43 3.66 PDW 1.36 0.0 UPV 78.95 50.00

a standard uniform distribution. Figure 2 visualizes the cumula-tive density of the observed 𝑝 -values. The results demonstrate that VOW, along with LeftHash, exhibits near-perfect alignment with the diagonal, confirming that our theoretical 𝑝 -value calculation accurately reflects the empirical FPR. In contrast, baselines like RDF and SelfHash show varying degrees of deviation (convexity), indicating a mismatch where the theoretical model tends to overes-timate the significance of the scores (i.e., yielding a conservative 

𝑝 -value distribution). 

6.2.2 The Quality-Detectability Trade-off. We further analyze the trade-off between detectability and text quality using perplexity (PPL) as a standard metric, where lower scores indicate more flu-ent text. Figure 3 demonstrates this trade-off between TPR (at FPR= 10 −5) and PPL for different schemes, with all samples gen-erated using multinomial sampling at temperature 0.7. VOW’s default parameters ( 𝛾 = 0.5 and 𝛿 = 2.5) strike a good balance, achieving TPR over 0.99 with only moderate increase in perplexity. Compared with KGW, VOW offers better detectabil-ity with comparable perplexity. In contrast, RDF, UPV, and PDW suffer severe quality degradation. They are not shown in the fig-ure for clarity as their perplexity scores reach 23.68, 25.46, and 1885.12, respectively (versus 5.10 for non-watermarked baseline). Crucially, VOW achieves this competitive performance while pro-viding cryptographic verifiability and privacy (lacking in KGW) and effectiveness on short texts (a limitation of PDW). VOW: Verifiable and Oblivious Watermark Detection for Large Language Models 

Table 2: Average similarity scores between original water-marked texts and attacked texts.                                

> Method Synonym Replacement Paraphrase (GPT-3.5-Turbo) Paraphrase (GPT-5.1)
> VOW ( ℎ=1)0.940 0.910 0.912 VOW ( ℎ=2)0.945 0.914 0.916 VOW ( ℎ=4)0.944 0.912 0.919 LeftHash 0.940 0.906 0.910 SelfHash 0.944 0.910 0.908 RDF 0.884 0.697 0.721 PDW 0.904 0.614 —UPV 0.938 0.905 0.888

6.2.3 Utility on Downstream Tasks. While PPL measures general text quality, a watermark’s true cost is its impact on a model’s utility in downstream tasks. To this end, we evaluate performance on mathematical reasoning (GSM8K [ 9], 4-shot) and code generation tasks (HumanEval [ 6], 0-shot) with the instruction-tuned Qwen2.5-3B model. These low-entropy tasks represent challenging scenarios where watermarking restricts the model’s ability to generate precise, constrained outputs. Table 1 reports the results. As expected, all watermarking meth-ods degrade performance. However, the degree of degradation varies dramatically. RDF and PDW are unusable, with accuracy/-pass@1 dropping below 4%. In contrast, VOW, KGW variants, and UPV remain practical, with VOW outperforming LeftHash and Self-Hash on both tasks. Notably, reducing 𝛿 from 2.5 to 2.0 improves VOW’s performance while maintaining strong detectability. This provides a flexible option for practitioners to balance watermarking strength and model utility based on their specific needs. 

## 6.3 Robustness Against Removal Attacks 

We evaluate the robustness of VOW and baseline schemes against two canonical removal attacks [ 48 ]: synonym replacement (edit attack) and paraphrasing (regeneration attack). Our goal is to as-sess VOW’s resilience and provide an up-to-date perspective on watermark robustness against current generative AI capabilities. 

6.3.1 Evaluation Metrics and Data Preparation. We employ two complementary metrics. The Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) quantifies the statistical separability between attacked watermarked samples and non-watermarked samples. This is also the primary metric used in prior work [ 27 ] to support robustness claims. How-ever, a high AUC alone does not ensure practical detectability, as it does not enforce a low, practical FPR. Therefore, we additionally report the TPR at a fixed FPR of 10 −2 (if applicable), which directly reflects the detection success rate under realistic operational thresh-olds. We evaluate on 100 positive (watermarked) and 100 negative (non-watermarked) samples, each approximately 500 tokens long, generated using questions in the ELI5 dataset as prompts for the instruction-tuned Llama 3.1-8B model. 

6.3.2 Attack Model. We consider a synonym replacement attack and two levels of paraphrasing attacks with different LLM backends. (1) Synonym replacement: The attack replaces 30% of eligible words (nouns, verbs, etc.) with synonyms sampled from the top-15 predictions of DistilBERT [39]. (2) Paraphrase by GPT-3.5-Turbo: We use the same paraphras-ing model, prompt, and parameters as in prior work [ 27 ], using the GPT-3.5-Turbo model to rewrite the watermarked text while preserving its meaning. (3) Paraphrase by GPT-5.1: We introduce a stronger attack us-ing the more capable GPT-5.1 model. All other settings re-main identical to the previous attack. This setup is designed to stress-test watermarking schemes against state-of-the-art paraphrasing capabilities. To validate the quality of our attacks, we measure semantic sim-ilarity between the original watermarked texts and attacked texts using the text-embedding-3-large model, as summarized in Table 2. The attacks maintain high semantic similarity across most schemes, with notable exceptions in RDF and PDW under paraphrasing at-tacks. The lower similarity scores (0.6–0.7) for these methods reflect the poor quality of their watermarked text rather than attack failure, consistent with their significantly higher perplexity scores. Indeed, in more than 100 out of 200 cases, GPT-5.1 refused to process RDF and PDW samples, citing their low quality and unclear meaning. 

6.3.3 Results. Figure 4 presents the AUC and TPR results under synonym replacement and paraphrasing attacks. All evaluated schemes demonstrate resilience to synonym replacement, with AUC scores exceeding 0.95 for most methods given sufficient to-kens. However, the TPR curves reveal significant performance gaps: RDF and UPV struggle to achieve TPR above 0.8 even with 500 tokens, suggesting weaker detection sensitivity under this attack. PDW completely fails under both synonym replacement and para-phrasing attacks, as these modifications disrupt its cryptographic signature; we therefore omit it from the figures for clarity. In con-trast, VOW and KGW variants achieve high TPRs ( > 0.9) with sufficient tokens. Notably, VOW’s robustness degrades as context length ℎ increases, empirically validating the trade-off between unforgeability and robustness discussed in Section 5. Paraphrasing attacks present a substantially more challenging threat. Against GPT-3.5-Turbo, we observe AUC scores for KGW variants slightly lower than previously reported [ 27 ], likely due to differences in generation settings. LeftHash and SelfHash exhibit better robustness than VOW with default ℎ = 4, though VOW with ℎ = 1 achieves comparable performance at the cost of re-duced unforgeability guarantees. When evaluated against the more capable GPT-5.1 model, all schemes show substantially degraded performance, with AUC and TPR scores declining across the board. RDF achieves the highest AUC and TPR against paraphrasing attacks among all evaluated schemes. However, its detection TPR of approximately 25% remains insufficient for practical deployment. Moreover, RDF’s watermarked text suffers from severely degraded quality, with perplexity of 23.68 versus 5.10 baseline. Its low se-mantic similarity scores after paraphrasing (Table 2) further raise questions about the nature of its robustness. Specifically, it remains unclear whether this apparent resilience reflects genuine robust-ness or merely the difficulty of paraphrasing already low-quality text. UPV and PDW perform worst, with AUC scores barely exceed-ing 0.5. Notably, UPV exhibits anomalous behavior where shorter Xiaokun Luan, Yihao Zhang, Pengcheng Su, Feiran Lei, and Meng Sun 0.4                      

> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> AUC
> Synonym Replacement Paraphrase (GPT-3.5 Turbo) Paraphrase (GPT-5.1)
> 0200 400 600
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> True Positive Rate
> 0200 400 600 0200 400 600
> Number of Tokens
> VOW ( h= 1) VOW ( h= 2) VOW ( h= 4) LeftHash SelfHash RDF UPV

Figure 4: AUC (top) and TPR (bottom) of different watermarking schemes under synonym replacement and paraphrasing attacks, with varying numbers of tokens used for detection. VOW       

> (h= 1)
> VOW
> (h= 2)
> VOW
> (h= 4)
> LeftHash SelfHash RDF
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> Detection  p-value  Non-watermarked Paraphrased (GPT-5.1)

Figure 5: Distribution of 𝑝 -values for detection results on negative samples and watermarked texts after paraphrasing by GPT-5.1. 

texts yield higher AUC and TPR than longer texts, contradicting the expected benefit of increased evidence. This suggests that its learning-based detection mechanism fails to generalize robustly after paraphrasing. To visualize the extent of this failure, Figure 5 presents the dis-tributions of detection 𝑝 -values for non-watermarked texts versus watermarked texts after GPT-5.1 paraphrasing. Before attack, wa-termarked texts yield 𝑝 -values centered near zero, indicating strong watermark presence. The split violin plots reveal a stark reality: the 𝑝 -value distributions for paraphrased samples (red) shift signif-icantly toward higher values, exhibiting a high degree of overlap with the non-watermarked baseline (blue). Although SelfHash and VOW (with ℎ = 1 and ℎ = 2) retain a visible tendency toward lower 

𝑝 -values, the substantial overlap indicates that reliable detection is no longer feasible. This statistical indistinguishability confirms that state-of-the-art semantic restructuring effectively neutralizes all evaluated watermarking schemes, preventing reliable detection in adversarial settings. These findings provide a critical recalibration for the field: the robustness of evaluated watermarking schemes against advanced LLM paraphrasing is overestimated . No scheme in our evaluation main-tains robust and reliable detection against GPT-5.1. For VOW, while its robustness strength is tunable via context length ℎ, it remains vulnerable to state-of-the-art paraphrasing attacks, a limitation shared across all evaluated paradigms. 

## 6.4 Efficiency and Overhead 

Inserting a watermark introduces computational overhead that can impact generation throughput and user experience. The efficiency of the detection process is also crucial for practical applications. These aspects, while important for deployment, are often over-looked in prior work. This section presents a performance analysis of VOW against baseline schemes, covering both insertion and detection overhead. Our evaluation also includes the unoptimized version of VOW to quantify the effectiveness of our optimizations discussed in Section 4.4. All performance benchmarks are conducted on a platform with an AMD Ryzen 9 7900X CPU and an NVIDIA RTX 5070 Ti GPU. 

6.4.1 Computational Overhead. We assess computational overhead from two perspectives: generation latency and detection runtime. Inserting watermarks primarily affects Inter-Token Latency (ITL), defined as the average time to generate each token after the first. Regarding Time to First Token (TTFT), most watermarking schemes exhibit performance similar to the non-watermarked baseline, ex-cept RDF, which requires a pre-computation phase incurring a delay of approximately 30 seconds. Therefore, our analysis focuses on ITL and detection runtime. VOW: Verifiable and Oblivious Watermark Detection for Large Language Models 

Table 3: Average inter-token latency (ITL) and detection run-time for different watermarking schemes (in milliseconds).                                          

> Method ITL (ms) w.r.t. Batch Size Detection
> 1832 Time (ms)
> No watermark 25.42 27.19 32.95 —VOW (unoptimized) 429.18 3280.86 12 890.53 62.20 VOW (multinomial) 31.10 50.81 79.77 VOW (top-10) 36.41 43.63 59.94 VOW (top-50) 43.52 48.35 87.78 LeftHash 27.25 34.71 41.20 118.18 SelfHash 108.21 714.43 2774.97 265.06 RDF 21.71 27.64 33.95 24 075.92 PDW 180.83 ——584.20 UPV 360.65 2967.60 11 103.28 7.73

Table 3 reports the ITL with varying batch sizes and the detection time on 500-token texts. The unoptimized VOW implementation incurs prohibitive overhead, with ITL exceeding 400 ms even at batch size 1. SelfHash and UPV exhibit a similar trend, as they also rely on iterative scanning over the vocabulary. However, our opti-mized VOW implementation dramatically reduces this cost. At a batch size of 32, our optimizations cut latency by over 99.4%, achiev-ing the third-lowest ITL among all evaluated methods. LeftHash demonstrates the lowest generation overhead, with only minimal delay compared to the non-watermarked baseline. Although RDF has the lowest ITL, its significant TTFT makes it less suitable for real-time applications. PDW’s reliance on rejection sampling (with a rejection rate of approximately 75%) results in high ITL. Its lack of support for batch generation further exacerbates performance is-sues. We also observed that the choice of watermarking parameters affects the ITL of VOW, as detailed in Appendix H. Regarding detection runtime on 500-token texts, most schemes complete within several hundred milliseconds, except RDF, which requires over 24 seconds due to its computationally intensive per-mutation test. UPV is the fastest on our evaluation platform, as it leverages GPU acceleration for neural network inference. Over-all, VOW achieves practical and highly competitive computational overhead for both insertion and detection. 

6.4.2 Communication Overhead. Compared with other watermark-ing schemes, VOW introduces additional communication overhead due to blinded inputs and evaluation proofs. This overhead is a nec-essary trade-off to achieve verifiability and user privacy. Neverthe-less, the overhead scales linearly with input text size, maintaining a communication expansion ratio of approximately 13.5 regardless of input length. Further details are provided in Appendix I. Note that KGW variants (LeftHash and SelfHash) and RDF also require communication between the User and Provider for detection, in-curring linear communication overhead as well. The key difference is that their communication does not involve cryptographic proofs, resulting in a lower expansion ratio. In contrast, PDW and UPV support local detection, where communication cost is limited to the one-time transmission of the public key and the public detection neural network, respectively. 

## 6.5 Empirical Unforgeability Analysis 

This section empirically evaluates the practical difficulty of forging our watermark, complementing the theoretical analysis in Section 5. We simulate a learning-based attacker who has collected a large corpus of watermarked text and extracted the green token patterns, then attempts to generate convincing forged text on unseen data. We generated a large watermarked corpus from the C4 dataset, containing over 100 million tokens. We processed this corpus to extract all green context-token pairs (𝑐, 𝑡 ), building a cache M that maps each context 𝑐 to its corresponding list of green tokens M ( 𝑐 ).This step simulates the attacker’s effort to learn the watermarking pattern from observed watermarked text. The resulting cache con-tains 5.8 × 10 7 green context-token pairs, of which 4.5 × 10 7 are unique. We designed a logits-based forgery strategy to balance the trade-off between green token proportion and semantic coherence. The attacker uses the same language model to generate text on a new, unseen dataset (ELI5), testing its ability to generalize the learned pattern. At each generation step, if the current context 𝑐 has entries in the cache, the logits for the corresponding green tokens M ( 𝑐 )

are aggressively boosted by 𝛿 ′ = 4.0. To maximize the chances of successful forgery, we generate longer samples ( 𝐿 ≈ 300 ) and evaluate them against a relaxed detection threshold with a false positive rate of 10 −2.Across 500 generated forgery attempts, we observed zero suc-cessful attacks, yielding an attack success rate (ASR) of 0%. The generated samples failed detection with a median 𝑝 -value of 0.225. Furthermore, the forgery attempts produced low-quality, incoher-ent text, as evidenced by a very high perplexity of 53.05. This outcome is consistent with our theoretical analysis in Section 5, which established a conservative lower bound of 9.7 × 10 10 cache entries for a viable attack. Our findings empirically confirm that this learning-based forgery strategy is ineffective in practice. 

## 6.6 Summary 

Table 4 provides a qualitative comparison of VOW against state-of-the-art baselines, synthesizing the results from our extensive evaluation. Our analysis highlights three key aspects that collec-tively make VOW a particularly compelling watermarking scheme. 

Bridging the Gap Between Security and Utility. Across the evaluated baselines, we observe a recurring tension between cryp-tographic assurances and generation-time usability . LeftHash and SelfHash preserve fluency and show strong detectability on short texts, but provide neither verifiability nor user privacy. While RDF is statistically distortion-free, the watermarking constraint some-times forces sampling from low-probability tokens, resulting in perceptible quality degradation despite theoretical guarantees. In contrast, cryptographic schemes such as PDW target public verifia-bility, but their design assumptions (e.g., long contexts) and severe text quality degradation make them difficult to deploy in practice. UPV attempts to balance these aspects using learning-based de-tection, but lacks rigorous FPR control and formal unforgeability guarantees. VOW bridges this gap: it achieves strong detectabil-ity on short texts with minor quality degradation while providing verifiability, user privacy, and provable unforgeability. Xiaokun Luan, Yihao Zhang, Pengcheng Su, Feiran Lei, and Meng Sun 

Table 4: Qualitative comparison of VOW against baselines. denotes full support or strong performance; G# denotes partial support or a heuristic security level without a formal proof in the original work; # denotes no support or poor performance.                                   

> Method Security Guarantees Core Performance Practicality & Overhead
> Verifiability Non-interactive Verification User Privacy Unforgeability Text Quality Detectability (Short Text) Robustness (Paraphrasing) Insertion Overhead Detection Overhead VOW ##
> LeftHash #####
> SelfHash ###G###
> RDF ###G#G##G##
> PDW ###
> UPV G#G###

Practicality for Real-World Deployment. Beyond theoretical properties, VOW demonstrates superior practicality. As quantified in Section 6.2 and Section 6.4, several baselines exhibit deployment-relevant limitations: SelfHash and UPV rely on inefficient iterative processes that hinder generation throughput, and PDW is not de-signed for short texts and also severely impacts generation quality. Although RDF has low inter-token latency, its generation over-head is dominated by a lengthy pre-computation phase. In addi-tion, RDF’s reliance on permutation tests means that verifying a watermark with the stringent FPR standards (e.g., 10 −6) entails a million-fold increase in compute compared to parametric detection methods (e.g., statistical tests). In contrast, VOW targets common operational regimes: it achieves a favorable detectability-quality trade-off, and (with the optimizations in Section 4.4) incurs competi-tive generation and detection overhead. Moreover, VOW maintains usable performance on low-entropy downstream tasks, providing practitioners a concrete knob (e.g., 𝛿 ) to balance utility and water-mark strength. 

A Recalibration of Robustness Expectations. Finally, our evaluation necessitates a recalibration of expectations regarding watermark robustness in the era of advanced LLMs. While most schemes demonstrate resilience to edit-based perturbations such as synonym substitution (with the exception of PDW and UPV), the landscape shifts dramatically under sophisticated semantic attacks. As indicated by the robustness results in Section 6.3, none of the evaluated schemes maintain reliable detection against a strong paraphrasing attacker (e.g., GPT-5.1). While RDF appears more robust under paraphrasing, this is largely an artifact of its lower baseline generation quality, evidenced by the frequent refusals from GPT-5.1 to process RDF samples. Overall, these results suggest that prior robustness claims can be optimistic. VOW addresses this by making the trade-off explicit: providing resilience against edit-based attacks while transparently acknowledging the boundaries of robustness against state-of-the-art rephrasing. Despite its strengths, VOW is not without limitations. First, the interactive detection protocol needs cooperation between the User and Provider, whereas PDW and UPV support local detection. Sec-ond, VOW incurs slightly higher generation overhead compared to the most efficient baselines like LeftHash. Third, as with all evalu-ated schemes, VOW’s robustness against advanced paraphrasing attacks remains limited. In conclusion, among the evaluated methods, VOW provides a balanced combination of (i) cryptographic verifiability and user privacy, (ii) strong detectability on short texts with controllable FPR, and (iii) practical overhead. This makes VOW a compelling instanti-ation of a watermarking scheme suited for real-world applications such as LLM API auditing and AI-generated content management. 

## 7 Related Work 

Our work is situated within the rapidly growing field of output watermarking for LLMs. Related but separate lines of work study model watermarking [ 46 , 49 ] and dataset watermarking [ 10 , 20 ]. To position our contribution, we first review related work focusing on enhancing watermark robustness and output quality. Finally, we discuss the emerging line of work that explores verifiable and private detection. 

## 7.1 Robustness vs. Imperceptibility 

The foundational watermarking paradigm introduced by [ 26 , 27 ]modifies the model’s output logits based on a secret key, estab-lishing the core trade-off between robustness and imperceptibility. Subsequent research has largely evolved along these two axes. One major thrust has focused on improving robustness against removal attacks. To defend against paraphrasing, several methods operate on sentence-level embeddings rather than on individual tokens [ 22 , 23 , 38 ]. Formal analysis has also been a focus. [ 47 ]provides provable robustness guarantees for a simplified, static green-list variant of the KGW scheme. DiPmark, a highly resilient watermark that preserves the output distribution and requires min-imal assumptions for detection, is developed by [ 43 ]. Notably, the core mechanism of DiPmark involves a PRF evaluation responsible for selecting the green-list. Therefore, it is compatible with our approach. Our VOPRF-based color determination logic could be integrated to grant verifiability and privacy. Another line of work has prioritized text quality and stealth. Some methods leverage adaptive watermarking strategies [ 33 ] and dual-key mechanisms [ 50 ] to reduce the watermark’s impact on text quality. The robust and distortion-free watermark [ 29 ] (RDF), one of the baseline methods used in our evaluation, proposes a VOW: Verifiable and Oblivious Watermark Detection for Large Language Models 

robust distortion-free sampling strategy that aims to strike a better balance between quality and robustness. However, our evaluation results indicate that RDF has a much more profound impact on text quality in practice. Other schemes achieve theoretical undetectabil-ity [ 8], demonstrating that a watermark’s statistical footprint can be perfectly eliminated, though at the cost of reduced robustness. While these works have significantly advanced watermark ro-bustness and imperceptibility, they operate under a centralized trust model where detection is performed by a single, trusted Provider who has full access to the text content. 

## 7.2 Verifiability and Privacy in Detection 

An emerging frontier in watermarking challenges the trust assump-tion of the detection process. Our work directly contributes to this area. Prior efforts like the publicly detectable watermark (PDW) [ 15 ]and theoretical cryptographic schemes [ 7 ] address this by allowing local verification via public keys. However, these asymmetric ap-proaches require embedding large payloads (e.g., signatures or code-words), rendering them impractical for short texts. Alternatively, learning-based methods such as UPV [ 31 ] achieve local detection by training a public detection network. While this offers privacy, the reliance on black-box neural networks lacks formal cryptographic guarantees for the consistency between insertion and detection processes. In contrast, VOW adopts a distinct paradigm: rather than relying on local detection, we leverage VOPRF to secure the interactive protocol. This design achieves both privacy and for-mal cryptographic verifiability without the length constraints of asymmetric schemes or the heuristic nature of neural detectors. 

## 7.3 Auditing of LLM Services 

Recent research has expanded the scope of LLM auditing from func-tional consistency [ 1] and data provenance [ 44 ] to system-level privacy risks like prompt caching side-channels [ 19 ]. Most relevant to our work is the auditing of service integrity, specifically detect-ing model downgrading where providers covertly serve inferior models [ 3, 51 ]. Some approaches address this via passive purely statistical analysis, utilizing log-probabilities [ 3] or rank-based uni-formity tests [ 51 ] to infer discrepancies in output distributions. Hardware-based solutions leveraging trusted execution environ-ments (TEEs) have also been proposed [ 3 ] but incur significant deployment costs. Our work addresses this integrity challenge from a different paradigm. Unlike these methods that attempt to infer model identity through post-hoc statistical probing, VOW intro-duces a constructive mechanism for accountability. By integrating a cryptographic proof directly into the generation process, we shift the auditing standard from probabilistic anomaly detection to ver-ifiable provenance, ensuring integrity without relying on heavy hardware solutions or revealing user data. 

## 8 Limitations 

VOW is designed for trust-minimized watermark detection in ser-vice auditing settings, and its guarantees should be interpreted within that scope. First, detection is interactive: the User must con-tact the Provider to obtain verified VOPRF evaluations. This differs from public-key watermarking schemes that support fully local detection, and it means VOW is most suitable when provider par-ticipation is acceptable and when short-text practicality and input privacy are more important than non-interactive verification. Second, VOW verifies the correctness of the detection compu-tation, not the entire generation process. The protocol prevents a malicious Provider from returning an incorrect detection result that still passes verification, but it does not by itself prove that the Provider always used the committed watermarking key or fixed parameters during generation. Deployment scenarios that require generation-time accountability should combine VOW with operational auditing, key-management policies, and statistical spot checks. Third, VOW does not solve the broader robustness problem for LLM watermarking. As our evaluation shows, advanced paraphras-ing attacks substantially weaken the detectability of all evaluated watermarking schemes, including VOW. For this reason, VOW should not be used as the sole basis for high-stakes punitive deci-sions about modified text. Its intended role is to provide privacy-preserving and verifiable provenance evidence for relatively intact outputs, especially in API auditing and service-integrity workflows. 

## 9 Conclusion 

This paper introduced VOW, a practical and efficient protocol that resolves a fundamental trust gap in LLM watermarking. By leverag-ing a Verifiable Oblivious Pseudorandom Function (VOPRF), VOW is the first scheme to provide both cryptographically verifiable and privacy-preserving watermark detection for short texts. Our comprehensive evaluation not only demonstrated VOW’s practical performance but also provided a timely reassessment of the water-marking landscape, revealing the fragility of widely-used schemes against modern paraphrasing attacks. Our work demonstrates that achieving accountability in generative AI need not come at the cost of user privacy, representing a critical step towards more trustwor-thy and rights-respecting systems. 

## Ethical Considerations 

This work addresses a trust gap in the Model-as-a-Service setting: the inability of users to audit service integrity without exposing sensitive data. Unlike traditional watermarking research focused on tracking misuse, VOW targets service auditing, where honest users need to verify API responses to detect model downgrading and SLA violations. In this context, both privacy and verifiability are practical requirements, not abstract principles. Users handling proprietary queries (e.g., confidential code or internal documents) cannot risk disclosing them to unverified providers, while providers facing false accusations need cryptographic proof to defend their integrity. These constraints drive our design. Standard symmetric water-marking forces plaintext disclosure for detection, creating an un-tenable privacy risk in multi-provider auditing. Public-key schemes avoid this but remain impractical for short texts. VOW’s oblivious detection via secure two-party computation resolves this tension: the provider can verify watermark presence without learning the user’s content, while the user obtains a cryptographically verifi-able result. The goal is to make auditing possible without turning detection into a content-sharing workflow. Xiaokun Luan, Yihao Zhang, Pengcheng Su, Feiran Lei, and Meng Sun 

We recognize that any content provenance mechanism carries dual-use risks. Watermarking could, in principle, be repurposed by powerful actors to track individuals. Still, VOW’s risk profile differs from prior work in three ways. First, the protocol serves a narrow, well-scoped use case (API auditing) where the user initiates veri-fication and controls the text, not a centralized authority. Second, the oblivious detection property fundamentally limits the informa-tion accessible to the provider, preventing bulk content monitor-ing. Third, the immediate problem VOW solves—unchecked model downgrading and lack of accountability in a rapidly consolidating API market—is concrete and present, whereas the surveillance risk is contingent on adoption patterns and regulatory context beyond the protocol itself. We publish this protocol to enable scrutiny and informed dis-cussion. Our engineering optimizations make VOW practical for deployment, but whether and how it should be deployed remains a question for the broader community, including providers, users, and policymakers. Our contribution is to show that privacy-preserving, verifiable watermark auditing can be practical even for short out-puts. 

## Open Science 

We make the artifacts associated with this work publicly avail-able, including source code, datasets, and evaluation scripts. These artifacts are accessible at: https://github.com/luan-xiaokun/voprf-llm-watermark The repository provides the necessary code and instructions to reproduce our main results. The artifacts are organized as follows: 

• Source Code : The repository contains the full implementation of our proposed watermarking scheme and all baseline meth-ods. Evaluation scripts for reproducing our experiments are also included. 

• Datasets : We provide the subset of the C4 dataset used in our experiments in the repository, along with scripts to download other public datasets and large language models used in our evaluation. 

• Experimental Results : We include the raw data and scripts necessary to reproduce all figures and tables presented in the paper. 

• Documentation : A comprehensive README file is provided, detailing the setup and usage of the artifacts. 

## References 

[1] Maryam Amirizaniani, Elias Martin, Tanya Roosta, Aman Chadha, and Chirag Shah. 2024. AuditLLM: A Tool for Auditing Large Language Models Using Multiprobe Approach (CIKM ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 5174–5179. doi:10.1145/3627673.3679222 [2] Dan Boneh. 1998. The Decision Diffie–Hellman problem. In Algorithmic Number Theory , Vol. 1423. Springer, 48–63. doi:10.1007/BFb0054851 [3] Will Cai, Tianneng Shi, Xuandong Zhao, and Dawn Song. 2025. Are You Getting What You Pay For? Auditing Model Substitution in LLM APIs. In NeurIPS 2025 Workshop on Regulatable ML . https://openreview.net/forum?id=thhrtv9P0s [4] Silvia Casacuberta, Julia Hesse, and Anja Lehmann. 2022. SoK: Oblivious Pseu-dorandom Functions. In 2022 IEEE 7th European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P) . IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 625–646. doi:10.1109/EuroSP53844.2022.00045 [5] David Chaum and Torben P. Pedersen. 1992. Wallet Databases with Observers. In 

Proceedings of the 12th Annual International Cryptology Conference on Advances in Cryptology . Springer, 89–105. [6] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2021. Eval-uating Large Language Models Trained on Code. arXiv:2107.03374 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374 [7] Miranda Christ and Sam Gunn. 2024. Pseudorandom Error-Correcting Codes. In Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2024 , Leonid Reyzin and Douglas Stebila (Eds.). Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 325–347. [8] Miranda Christ, Sam Gunn, and Or Zamir. 2024. Undetectable Watermarks for Language Models. In Proceedings of Thirty Seventh Conference on Learning Theory (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 247) , Shipra Agrawal and Aaron Roth (Eds.). PMLR, 1125–1139. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v247/christ24a.html [9] Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. 2021. Training Verifiers to Solve Math Word Problems. arXiv:2110.14168 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.14168 [10] Xinyue Cui, Johnny Wei, Swabha Swayamdipta, and Robin Jia. 2025. Robust Data Watermarking in Language Models by Injecting Fictitious Knowledge. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria, 14292–14306. doi:10. 18653/v1/2025.findings-acl.736 [11] Sumanth Dathathri, Abigail See, Sumedh Ghaisas, Po-Sen Huang, Rob McAdam, Johannes Welbl, Vandana Bachani, Alex Kaskasoli, Robert Stanforth, Tatiana Matejovicova, Jamie Hayes, Nidhi Vyas, Majd Al Merey, Jonah Brown-Cohen, Rudy Bunel, Borja Balle, Taylan Cemgil, Zahra Ahmed, Kitty Stacpoole, Ilia Shumailov, Ciprian Baetu, Sven Gowal, Demis Hassabis, and Pushmeet Kohli. 2024. Scalable watermarking for identifying large language model outputs. 

Nature 634 (Oct. 2024), 818–823. doi:10.1038/s41586-024-08025-4 [12] Alex Davidson, Armando Faz-Hernandez, Nick Sullivan, and Christopher A. Wood. 2023. Oblivious Pseudorandom Functions (OPRFs) Using Prime-Order Groups. RFC 9497. doi:10.17487/RFC9497 [13] Alex Davidson, Ian Goldberg, Nick Sullivan, George Tankersley, and Filippo Valsorda. 2018. Privacy Pass: Bypassing Internet Challenges Anonymously. 

Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2018 (2018), 164 – 180. doi:10. 1515/POPETS-2018-0026 [14] European Parliament and Council. 2024. The EU AI Act. Official Journal of the European Union, L 2024/1689. https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/the-act/ Official full title: Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2024 laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence and amending Regulations (EC) No 300/2008, (EU) No 167/2013, (EU) No 168/2013, (EU) 2018/858, (EU) 2018/1139 and (EU) 2019/2144 and Directives 2006/42/EC, 2014/30/EU and (EU) 2016/797 (Artificial Intelligence Act). Adopted on June 13, 2024.. [15] Jaiden Fairoze, Sanjam Garg, Somesh Jha, Saeed Mahloujifar, Mohammad Mahmoody, and Mingyuan Wang. 2023. Publicly-Detectable Watermarking for Language Models. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2023/1661. https: //eprint.iacr.org/2023/1661 [16] Angela Fan, Yacine Jernite, Ethan Perez, David Grangier, Jason Weston, and Michael Auli. 2019. ELI5: Long Form Question Answering. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , Anna Ko-rhonen, David Traum, and Lluís Màrquez (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy, 3558–3567. doi:10.18653/v1/P19-1346 [17] Pierre Fernandez, Antoine Chaffin, Karim Tit, Vivien Chappelier, and Teddy Furon. 2023. Three Bricks to Consolidate Watermarks for Large Language Models. In 2023 IEEE International Workshop on Information Forensics and Security (WIFS) .1–6. doi:10.1109/WIFS58808.2023.10374576 [18] Shafi Goldwasser, Silvio Micali, and Charles Rackoff. 1985. The knowledge complexity of interactive proof-systems. In Proceedings of the 17th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing . Association for Computing Machinery, 291–304. doi:10.1145/22145.22178 [19] Chenchen Gu, Xiang Lisa Li, Rohith Kuditipudi, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2025. Auditing Prompt Caching in Language Model APIs. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning . https://openreview.net/ forum?id=gUj2fxQcLZ [20] Junfeng Guo, Yiming Li, Lixu Wang, Shu-Tao Xia, Heng Huang, Cong Liu, and Bo Li. 2023. Domain watermark: effective and harmless dataset copyright pro-tection is closed at hand. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (NIPS ’23) . Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, Article 2371, 30 pages. VOW: Verifiable and Oblivious Watermark Detection for Large Language Models 

[21] Le Quan Ha, E. I. Sicilia-Garcia, Ji Ming, and F. J. Smith. 2002. Extension of Zipf’s law to words and phrases. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Computational Linguistics - Volume 1 (Taipei, Taiwan) (COLING ’02) . Association for Computational Linguistics, USA, 1–6. doi:10.3115/1072228.1072345 [22] Abe Hou, Jingyu Zhang, Tianxing He, Yichen Wang, Yung-Sung Chuang, Hong-wei Wang, Lingfeng Shen, Benjamin Van Durme, Daniel Khashabi, and Yulia Tsvetkov. 2024. SemStamp: A Semantic Watermark with Paraphrastic Robustness for Text Generation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North Ameri-can Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Mexico City, Mexico, 4067–4082. doi:10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-long.226 [23] Abe Hou, Jingyu Zhang, Yichen Wang, Daniel Khashabi, and Tianxing He. 2024. k-SemStamp: A Clustering-Based Semantic Watermark for Detection of Machine-Generated Text. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Bangkok, Thailand, 1706–1715. doi:10.18653/v1/2024. findings-acl.98 [24] Stanislaw Jarecki, Aggelos Kiayias, and Hugo Krawczyk. 2014. Round-Optimal Password-Protected Secret Sharing and T-PAKE in the Password-Only Model. In 

Advances in Cryptology – ASIACRYPT 2014 , Palash Sarkar and Tetsu Iwata (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 233–253. [25] Daniel Kang, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Ion Stoica, and Yi Sun. 2022. Scaling up Trustless DNN Inference with Zero-Knowledge Proofs. arXiv:2210.08674 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.08674 [26] John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Jonathan Katz, Ian Miers, and Tom Goldstein. 2023. A Watermark for Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 202) , Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (Eds.). PMLR, 17061– 17084. [27] John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Manli Shu, Khalid Saifullah, Kezhi Kong, Kasun Fernando, Aniruddha Saha, Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein. 2024. On the Reliability of Watermarks for Large Language Models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations . https://openreview. net/forum?id=DEJIDCmWOz [28] Lea Kissner and Dawn Xiaodong Song. 2005. Privacy-Preserving Set Operations. In Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2005 , Vol. 3621. Springer, 241–257. doi:10. 1007/11535218_15 [29] Rohith Kuditipudi, John Thickstun, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. 2024. Robust Distortion-free Watermarks for Language Models. Transactions on Ma-chine Learning Research (2024). https://openreview.net/forum?id=FpaCL1MO2C [30] Zilong Lin, Jian Cui, Xiaojing Liao, and XiaoFeng Wang. 2024. Malla: Demysti-fying Real-world Large Language Model Integrated Malicious Services. In 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24) . USENIX Association, Philadel-phia, PA, 4693–4710. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity24/ presentation/lin-zilong [31] Aiwei Liu, Leyi Pan, Xuming Hu, Shuang Li, Lijie Wen, Irwin King, and Philip S. Yu. 2024. An Unforgeable Publicly Verifiable Watermark for Large Language Models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .https://openreview.net/forum?id=gMLQwKDY3N [32] Aiwei Liu, Leyi Pan, Yijian Lu, Jingjing Li, Xuming Hu, Xi Zhang, Lijie Wen, Irwin King, Hui Xiong, and Philip Yu. 2024. A Survey of Text Watermarking in the Era of Large Language Models. ACM Comput. Surv. 57, 2, Article 47 (Nov. 2024), 36 pages. doi:10.1145/3691626 [33] Yepeng Liu and Yuheng Bu. 2024. Adaptive text watermark for large language models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning 

(Vienna, Austria) (ICML’24) . JMLR.org, Article 1238, 20 pages. [34] Meta. 2023. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models. arXiv:2307.09288. arXiv:2307.09288 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288 [35] OpenAI. 2024. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv:2303.08774. arXiv:2303.08774 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774 [36] Qwen. 2025. Qwen2.5 Technical Report. arXiv:2412.15115. arXiv:2412.15115 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115 [37] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 21, 1, Article 140 (Jan. 2020), 67 pages. [38] Jie Ren, Han Xu, Yiding Liu, Yingqian Cui, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, and Jiliang Tang. 2024. A Robust Semantics-based Watermark for Large Language Model against Paraphrasing. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024 , Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Mexico City, Mexico, 613–625. doi:10. 18653/v1/2024.findings-naacl.40 [39] Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. 2020. DistilBERT, a distilled version of BERT: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv:1910.01108 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01108 [40] Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Nicolas Papernot, Ross J. Ander-son, and Yarin Gal. 2024. AI models collapse when trained on recursively gener-ated data. Nature 631, 8022 (July 2024), 755–759. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07566-y [41] Yanshen Sun, Jianfeng He, Limeng Cui, Shuo Lei, and Chang-Tien Lu. 2024. Exploring the Deceptive Power of LLM-Generated Fake News: A Study of Real-World Detection Challenges. arXiv:2403.18249 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2403.18249 [42] The White House. 2023. Executive Order 14110: Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy De-velopment and Use of Artificial Intelligence. Federal Register, 75191–75226 pages. https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2023-24283 Signed on October 30, 2023. [43] Yihan Wu, Zhengmian Hu, Junfeng Guo, Hongyang Zhang, and Heng Huang. 2024. A resilient and accessible distribution-preserving watermark for large language models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (Vienna, Austria) (ICML’24) . JMLR.org, Article 2190, 28 pages. [44] Yixin Wu, Ziqing Yang, Yun Shen, Michael Backes, and Yang Zhang. 2025. Syn-thetic artifact auditing: tracing LLM-generated synthetic data usage in down-stream applications. In Proceedings of the 34th USENIX Conference on Security Symposium (Seattle, WA, USA) (SEC ’25) . USENIX Association, USA, Article 88, 20 pages. [45] Andrew C. Yao. 1982. Protocols for secure computations. In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) . IEEE, 160–164. doi:10.1109/SFCS.1982.38 [46] Ruisi Zhang, Shehzeen Samarah Hussain, Paarth Neekhara, and Farinaz Koushan-far. 2024. REMARK-LLM: a robust and efficient watermarking framework for generative large language models. In Proceedings of the 33rd USENIX Conference on Security Symposium (Philadelphia, PA, USA) (SEC ’24) . USENIX Association, USA, Article 102, 18 pages. [47] Xuandong Zhao, Prabhanjan Vijendra Ananth, Lei Li, and Yu-Xiang Wang. 2024. Provable Robust Watermarking for AI-Generated Text. In The Twelfth Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations . https://openreview.net/forum? id=SsmT8aO45L [48] Xuandong Zhao, Sam Gunn, Miranda Christ, Jaiden Fairoze, Andres Fabrega, Nicholas Carlini, Sanjam Garg, Sanghyun Hong, Milad Nasr, Florian Tramer, Somesh Jha, Lei Li, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Dawn Song. 2025. SoK: Watermarking for AI-Generated Content . In 2025 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) .IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2621–2639. doi:10.1109/SP61157. 2025.00178 [49] Xuandong Zhao, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Lei Li. 2023. Protecting language genera-tion models via invisible watermarking. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (Honolulu, Hawaii, USA) (ICML’23) . JMLR.org, Article 1774, 13 pages. [50] Chaoyi Zhu, Jeroen Galjaard, Pin-Yu Chen, and Lydia Chen. 2024. Duwak: Dual Watermarks in Large Language Models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Bangkok, Thailand, 11416–11436. doi:10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.678 [51] Xiaoyuan Zhu, Yaowen Ye, Tianyi Qiu, Hanlin Zhu, Sijun Tan, Ajraf Mannan, Jonathan Michala, Raluca Ada Popa, and Willie Neiswanger. 2025. Auditing Black-Box LLM APIs with a Rank-Based Uniformity Test. arXiv:2506.06975 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.06975 

## A Proof of Correctness for Unbiased Sampling 

We prove the described rejection sampling algorithm in Section 4.4 samples tokens from the desired target distribution 𝑞 (𝑡 ), where 

𝑞 (𝑡 ) ∝ 𝑝 (𝑡 ) · exp (𝛿 )𝟙 (𝑡 ∈𝐺 ) and 𝟙 (·) is the indicator function. 

Proof. Let 𝑅 = V \ 𝐺 be the set of red tokens. The normalized target distribution 𝑞 (𝑡 ) is explicitly given by: 

𝑞 (𝑡 ) = 1

𝑍 · 𝑝 (𝑡 ) · exp (𝛿 )𝟙 (𝑡 ∈𝐺 ) ,

where 𝑍 is the normalization constant: 

𝑍 =∑︁ 

𝑡 ′ ∈𝑅 

𝑝 (𝑡 ′) + exp (𝛿 )∑︁ 

𝑡 ′ ∈𝐺 

𝑝 (𝑡 ′). (7) In a single trial of the algorithm, a token 𝑡 is sampled from 𝑝 (𝑡 )

and accepted with probability Pr (accept | 𝑡 ). The joint probability Xiaokun Luan, Yihao Zhang, Pengcheng Su, Feiran Lei, and Meng Sun 

of sampling and accepting a specific token 𝑡 in one trial is: 

Pr (𝑡 is accepted ) = 𝑝 (𝑡 ) · Pr (accept | 𝑡 )

=

(

𝑝 (𝑡 ) · 1, if 𝑡 ∈ 𝐺, 𝑝 (𝑡 ) · exp (− 𝛿 ), if 𝑡 ∈ 𝑅. 

The total probability of accepting any token in a single trial is the sum over all 𝑡 :

Pr (accept ) =∑︁  

> 𝑡 ∈𝐺

𝑝 (𝑡 ) + ∑︁  

> 𝑡 ∈𝑅

𝑝 (𝑡 ) exp (− 𝛿 )

= exp (− 𝛿 ) exp (𝛿 )∑︁  

> 𝑡 ∈𝐺

𝑝 (𝑡 ) + ∑︁  

> 𝑡 ∈𝑅

𝑝 (𝑡 )

!

.

Comparing the term in the parentheses with Equation 7, we observe that Pr (accept ) = 𝑍 · exp (− 𝛿 ). Finally, the probability of the algo-rithm outputting 𝑡 is the probability of 𝑡 being accepted conditioned on an acceptance occurring: 

Pr (output = 𝑡 ) = Pr (𝑡 is accepted )

Pr (accept ) .

Substituting the values derived above: 

• If 𝑡 ∈ 𝐺 : Pr (output = 𝑡 ) = 𝑝 (𝑡 )   

> 𝑍 ·exp (− 𝛿 )

= 𝑝 (𝑡 ) · exp (𝛿 ) 

> 𝑍

= 𝑞 (𝑡 ).

• If 𝑡 ∈ 𝑅 : Pr (output = 𝑡 ) = 𝑝 (𝑡 ) · exp (− 𝛿 )   

> 𝑍 ·exp (− 𝛿 )

= 𝑝 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑍

= 𝑞 (𝑡 ).

Thus, the output distribution is identical to 𝑞 (𝑡 ). The rejection sampling process therefore produces unbiased samples from the desired target distribution. □

## B Learning Attack Cost Analysis 

We analyze the cost of the learning attack described in Section 5, specifically the number of unique n-grams an attacker must cache, 

𝑚 zipf , to achieve a target hit rate 𝑝 hit .The distribution of n-grams in natural language is known to follow a highly skewed distribution that can be modeled by a gener-alized Zipf’s law. The frequency of the 𝑟 -th most common n-gram, 

𝑓 𝑟 , is inversely proportional to its rank 𝑟 raised to an exponent 𝑠 :

𝑓 𝑟 ∝ 1

𝑟 𝑠 , (8) where 0 < 𝑠 ≤ 1 is the exponent that characterizes the skewness of the distribution. Assuming that the attacker caches the 𝑚 zipf most frequent n-grams, the cache hit rate 𝑝 hit is the cumulative probability of these n-grams. This can be expressed as the ratio of the generalized harmonic numbers: 

𝑝 hit = 𝐻 𝑚 zipf ,𝑠 

𝐻 𝑀,𝑠 

, (9) where 𝑀 is the total number of unique n-grams in the language, and 𝐻 𝑛,𝑠 is the generalized harmonic number, defined as: 

𝐻 𝑛,𝑠 =

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

1

𝑖 𝑠 . (10) Given that both 𝑚 zipf and 𝑀 are large numbers, we can accurately approximate this discrete sum with a continuous integral: 

𝐻 𝑛,𝑠 ≈

∫ 𝑛 

> 1

1

𝑥 𝑠 𝑑𝑥 = 𝑛 1−𝑠 − 11 − 𝑠 . (11) Consequently, the cache hit rate 𝑝 hit can be approximated as: 

𝑝 hit ≈ 𝑚 1−𝑠  

> zipf

− 1

𝑀 1−𝑠 − 1 . (12) In other words, to achieve a cache hit rate of 𝑝 hit , the attacker needs to cache 𝑚 zipf n-grams such that 

𝑚 zipf ≈  𝑝 hit (𝑀 1−𝑠 − 1) + 1 11−𝑠 ≈ 𝑝 11−𝑠  

> hit

𝑀. (13) Prior linguistic studies [ 21 ] have shown that for 4-gram English models, the exponent 𝑠 is typically in the range of 0.39–0.42. As-suming 𝑠 = 0.4 and a conservative estimate for the total number of unique 4-grams 𝑀 = 10 12 , the attacker needs to cache about 

9.7 × 10 10 4-grams to achieve a cache hit rate of 24 .62% . The re-sult that the attacker must cache approximately 97 billion unique 4-grams forms the basis of the storage and collection cost analysis in the main text. 

Generalization to the KGW Scheme. Our unforgeability analysis, which hinges on a sufficiently large context length ℎ, can be ex-tended to formalize the security of the KGW scheme [ 26 ], a topic not addressed in its original proposal. The security of both VOW and KGW against forgery relies on the same fundamental challenge for an attacker: the difficulty of learning the secret “rule set” of green context-token pairs. A key distinction appears to lie in the granularity of the detection feedback. Our verifiable protocol explicitly provides a fine-grained, token-level color signal. In contrast, a standard KGW detector seems coarser, typically returning a single 𝑝 -value for an entire text. How-ever, this coarse feedback does not prevent a determined adversary from inferring token-level information. An attacker can perform a differential analysis to reconstruct the fine-grained signals. For instance, by systematically changing one token in a text and observ-ing the resulting change in the 𝑝 -value, they can deduce the color of that specific token in its given context. This implies that an attacker can, over time, effectively construct the same Green-Token Oracle for the KGW scheme that our threat model assumes for VOW. Therefore, KGW is subject to the same powerful learning attacks, and its unforgeability similarly relies on the context length ℎ being large enough to make the rule set computationally infeasible to learn via birthday attacks. Our analysis thus provides a formal foundation for evaluating the unforgeability of the entire Green-Red watermarking paradigm when strong adversaries are considered. 

## C Watermarking Parameter Selection 

Experimental Setup. We use grid search to evaluate the trade-off between generation quality and watermark detectability across different watermark parameter settings. We fix context length ℎ to 4, and vary 𝛾 and 𝛿 . We employ two different sampling strategies: default multinomial sampling and top-50 multinomial sampling with nucleus sampling ( 𝑝 = 0.9). The latter setting is commonly used in various text generation tasks and is expected to yield higher-quality outputs. We use the 500 prompts sampled and truncated from the C4 dataset for evaluation. All texts are generated using the same Qwen2.5-3B model and each contains about 200 tokens. 

Results and Findings. The results are summarized in Figure 6, where the red dashed lines represent the perplexity of texts gener-ated without any watermark, serving as a baseline for comparison. VOW: Verifiable and Oblivious Watermark Detection for Large Language Models 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5 8.0 

Perplexity (better → ) 

0

20 

40 

60 

80 

100 

> TPR @ 10 −5  FPR

Gamma 

γ: 0.125 

γ: 0.250 

γ: 0.375 

γ: 0.500 

γ: 0.625 

γ: 0.750 

γ: 0.875 

Gamma 

γ: 0.125 

γ: 0.250 

γ: 0.375 

γ: 0.500 

γ: 0.625 

γ: 0.750 

γ: 0.875 

1.0 

1.5 

2.0 

2.5 

3.0 

3.5 

4.0 

> Delta

3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 

Perplexity (better → ) 

20 

40 

60 

80 

100 

> TPR @ 10 −5  FPR

Gamma 

γ: 0.125 

γ: 0.250 

γ: 0.375 

γ: 0.500 

γ: 0.625 

γ: 0.750 

γ: 0.875 

Gamma 

γ: 0.125 

γ: 0.250 

γ: 0.375 

γ: 0.500 

γ: 0.625 

γ: 0.750 

γ: 0.875 

1.0 

1.5 

2.0 

2.5 

3.0 

3.5 

4.0 

> Delta

Figure 6: Trade-off between perplexity and true positive rate at 10 −5 false positive rate with default multinomial (Top) and top-50 (Bottom) sampling. The context length is set to ℎ = 4. Outliers with high perplexity or low true positive rate are excluded for visibility. The red dashed line indicates the perplexity of texts with no watermark using the same sampling setting. 

The figures demonstrate the trade-off between perplexity and TPR at a fixed FPR of 10 −5. It is clear that increasing the watermark strength (i.e., using a larger 𝛿 ) generally leads to an increase in per-plexity, but also an increase in TPR. As the green token probability 

𝛾 increases, the bias strength 𝛿 needs to be increased accordingly to maintain high detectability. However, if 𝛾 is too small or too large, e.g., 𝛾 = 0.125 or 𝛾 = 0.875 , the watermark may become either too weak or too strong and very sensitive to 𝛿 . Our default setting 

𝛾 = 0.5, 𝛿 = 2.5 strikes a balance between these factors. 

Difference between KGW Settings. We note that the recommended watermark parameters of the KGW scheme, including both the LeftHash and the SelfHash variants, yield suboptimal performance for our proposed watermarking scheme, although the two methods share similar mechanisms. Such discrepancy could be caused by the different sampling strategies employed in the two methods. As we mentioned in Section 4.4, the KGW scheme employs a biased multinomial sampling strategy, which is different from our unbiased sampling approach. 

## D Data Preparation Details 

We use the news-like subset of the C4 dataset for generating water-marked text samples. Specifically, we randomly sample 500 texts in this subset and use the first 60 tokens as the prompt for text generation. We used a default multinomial sampling strategy with Xiaokun Luan, Yihao Zhang, Pengcheng Su, Feiran Lei, and Meng Sun 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

Theoretical Quantiles 

> −0.03
> −0.02
> −0.01
> 0.00
> 0.01
> 0.02
> 0.03
> Quantile Residuals  Perfect Uniformity

Figure 7: Pseudorandomness of the partitioning predicate 

IsGreen . The 𝑥 -axis is the expected uniform distribution, and the 𝑦 -axis is the observed quantile residuals from 1M sam-pled contexts. The dashed line indicates the ideal uniform distribution. 

a temperature of 0.7. The generated texts contain about 209 tokens on average and are used for evaluating detectability, text quality, and computational efficiency. Watermarked text samples for robustness evaluation are gener-ated using the ELI5 dataset [ 16 ], which contains long-form answers to open-ended questions. We randomly select 100 questions as prompts for data preparation. For better text quality, we use the instruction-tuned version of Llama 3.1-8B and employ a top-50 sampling strategy with a temperature of 0.7. The prompt template is as follows: Explain the following question like I’m 5 years old. Use very simple language, short sentences, and analogies a child can understand. Question: {question} The prompt used for paraphrasing is taken from prior work [ 27 ]: As an expert copy-editor, please rewrite the following text in your own voice while ensuring that the final output contains the same information as the original text and has roughly the same length. Please paraphrase all sentences and do not omit any crucial details. Additionally, please take care to provide any relevant information about public figures, organizations, or other entities mentioned in the text to avoid any potential misunderstandings or biases. 

## E Foundational Validation 

The security of the proposed watermarking scheme is built upon two critical assumptions: the event 𝑡 ∈ 𝐺 occurs with probability 𝛾 ,and the Binomial test correctly estimates the 𝑝 -value. We validate the pseudorandomness assumption of the constructed predicate and the reliability of the watermark detection process, which serve as the foundation for the security of the proposed watermarking scheme. 10 −6 10 −4 10 −2 10 0

Theoretical FPR 

> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> Empirical FPR / Theoretical FPR
> Ideal Ratio

Figure 8: Theoretical false positive rate (FPR) and the ratio of empirical to theoretical FPRs with context length ℎ = 4.The dashed line indicates the ideal ratio of 1. Table 5: Detection results of UPV’s two neural networks on 1M non-watermarked texts from the C4 dataset.     

> Positive by Generation NN Negative by Generation NN Positive by Detection NN 1437 311
> Negative by Detection NN 6483 991 769

Pseudorandomness. Our detection process returns a 𝑝 -value as-suming that the event 𝑡 ∈ 𝐺 occurs with probability 𝛾 . To vali-date the pseudorandomness of the predicate IsGreen , we randomly sample 1M contexts from the C4 dataset and generate different watermarking keys to partition the vocabulary a million times. For each partitioning, we conduct a Pearson’s chi-squared test to check whether the observed distribution of green tokens matches the expected distribution. Each chi-squared test returns a 𝑝 -value, and we expect the 𝑝 -values to be uniformly distributed in [0, 1]. The quantile residual plot in Figure 7 shows the difference between the observed distribution and the expected uniform distribution. The observed quantile residuals are centered around zero with a low variance, indicating that the observed distribution closely follows the expected uniform distribution. Therefore, we conclude that the predicate IsGreen is pseudorandom, and that the event 𝑡 ∈ 𝐺 

follows a Bernoulli distribution with parameter 𝛾 .

Detector Reliability. As pointed out by [ 17 ], empirical false posi-tive rates (FPRs) of watermark detectors can be much higher than theoretical ones due to pseudorandomness and repetitive texts. To ensure the reliability of the watermark detection process, we conduct a large-scale evaluation of the watermark detector. We compare the empirical and theoretical FPRs of the watermark de-tector using 1M sampled texts with length 255 tokens from the C4 dataset. The quantile ratio plot in Figure 8 shows that empirical FPRs closely match theoretical ones. This demonstrates that our statistical test for watermark detection is reliable. VOW: Verifiable and Oblivious Watermark Detection for Large Language Models 

## F Detection Reliability Evaluation of UPV 

UPV [ 31 ] uses two separate neural networks for vocabulary par-titioning and watermark detection, respectively. The generation neural network is capable of determining the green/red status of each token in a context, while the detection neural network pre-dicts whether a given text is watermarked. To evaluate the detection reliability of UPV, we test the detection results of UPV’s two neu-ral networks on 1M non-watermarked texts sampled from the C4 dataset. Specifically, the generation neural network is used to count the number of green tokens in each text, and a 𝑧 -score of 4.0 is used as the detection threshold; the detection neural network directly predicts whether the text is watermarked. The evaluation results are shown in Table 5. Although the two neural networks give consistent predictions for the majority of texts, there is still a 0.68% inconsistency rate, i.e., one network predicts positive while the other predicts negative. Furthermore, UPV’s detection neural network has an uncontrollable false positive rate of approximately 0.17%. This is not only significantly higher than the stringent 10 −5 threshold used for other methods in our evaluation, but also suggests that UPV’s detection neural network may not provide reliable FPR guarantees in practice. 

## G Why KGW Fails on Paraphrasing Attacks 

Our evaluation in Section 6.3 concludes that KGW watermarks are vulnerable to modern paraphrasing attacks, a finding that con-trasts with the higher robustness reported in the original KGW evaluation [ 27 ]. Specifically, the prior work reported AUC scores above 0.85 for LeftHash and 0.9 for SelfHash, whereas our evalua-tion on GPT-3.5-Turbo paraphrasing yielded AUC scores below 0.8 for both. To provide a clear explanation for this discrepancy, we systematically compare the two experimental setups. Several parameters in our evaluation were kept consistent with the prior work to ensure a fair comparison. The core KGW scheme settings were identical ( 𝛾 = 0.25 and 𝛿 = 2.0). We used the same paraphrasing prompt and sampling setup (temperature 0.7), and the resulting text lengths were comparable (around 500–1000 tokens). Minor differences existed in the base model used for watermark-ing (our Llama 3.1-8B-Instruct vs. their Llama-7B) and the prompt dataset (our ELI5 vs. their C4). However, it is unlikely that these factors alone would cause such a drop in AUC scores. We attribute the observed discrepancy in robustness primarily to the following two factors: 

• Paraphraser Capability Evolution: Although both evaluations utilized “GPT-3.5-Turbo”, the model may have undergone updates between the original KGW study (circa 2023) and our evaluation (2025). These updates likely enhanced the model’s ability to preserve semantic content while altering syntactic structures and word choices, thus making it more effective at removing watermark signals. 

• Number of Evaluation Samples: The prior evaluation used more than 1000 samples for robustness testing, while our eval-uation used 200 samples due to computational and budget con-straints. Considering the stochastic nature of LLM paraphrasing, a larger sample size usually leads to more stable and reliable AUC estimates. The smaller sample size in our evaluation may 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 

Delta ( δ)      

> 500
> 750
> 1000
> 1250
> 1500
> Throughput (TPS)  Multinomial
> Top-10
> Top-50 0.125 0.250 0.375 0.500 0.625 0.750 0.875

Gamma ( γ)

> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> 1200
> Throughput (TPS)  Multinomial
> Top-10
> Top-50

Figure 9: End-to-end throughput of VOW under different parameter settings. 𝛾 is fixed to 0.5 in the top figure, and 𝛿 is fixed to 2.5 in the bottom figure. 

have introduced higher variance, potentially contributing to the lower observed AUC scores. 

## H Impact of Watermarking Parameters on Generation Speed 

We report the end-to-end throughput under different sampling strategies in Figure 9. The experimental platform is the same as described in Section 6. Three sampling strategies are evaluated: default multinomial sampling, and top-k sampling with 𝑘 = 10 and 

𝑘 = 50 . As the 𝛿 value increases or the 𝛾 value decreases, the gener-ation speed tends to decrease for all evaluated sampling strategies. For top-k sampling, this is because a larger 𝛿 value increases the number of candidate tokens that need to be checked after the filter-ing. For the default multinomial sampling without top-k filtering, our analysis in Section 4.4 shows that the expected number of calls to the IsGreen predicate per generated token is: 

exp (𝛿 )

1 + ( exp (𝛿 ) − 1)𝛾 = 1

𝛾 + ( 1 − 𝛾 ) exp (− 𝛿 ) . (14) Thus, a larger 𝛿 leads to a higher expected number of calls, and consequently a lower throughput. For top-k sampling, our two-stage optimization in Section 4.4 first filters out non-top-k tokens to obtain a smaller candidate set 

𝐶 𝑘 , and then iterates over 𝐶 𝑘 with early stopping to construct the final token distribution. To investigate the impact of watermark parameter 𝛿 and sampling parameter 𝑘 on the effectiveness of this Xiaokun Luan, Yihao Zhang, Pengcheng Su, Feiran Lei, and Meng Sun 0     

> 200
> 400
> Count
> δ= 1 δ= 2
> 20 50 80

Top-k   

> 0
> 1000
> 2000
> Count
> δ= 3
> 20 50 80

Top-k  

> δ= 4
> Candidate Set Size Number of Iterated Tokens

Figure 10: Average size of the candidate set 𝐶 𝑘 and the average number of tokens iterated over before early stopping under different watermark parameter 𝛿 and sampling parameter 𝑘 .

optimization, we measure the average size of the candidate set 𝐶 𝑘 

and the actual number of tokens iterated over before early stopping. The results are summarized in Figure 10. As 𝑘 increases, both the average size of the candidate set 𝐶 𝑘 and the average number of iterated tokens increase. This is expected since a larger 𝑘 allows more tokens to be included in 𝐶 𝑘 . However, the average number of iterated tokens grows much more slowly than the size of 𝐶 𝑘 , espe-cially when 𝛿 is large. The slopes of the curves for the candidate set size are 1.97, 3.77, 7.53, and 14.31 for 𝛿 = 1, 2, 3, 4, respectively, while the slopes for the average number of iterated tokens are within the range of 1.88 to 2.13. Additionally, the variance of the average number of iterated tokens is smaller than that of the candidate set size. This demonstrates that our early stopping strategy is effective in reducing the number of tokens that need to be processed, thereby improving generation speed. 

## I Communication Overhead of Verifiable Watermarking 

As shown in Figure 11, the total data transfer scales linearly with the input text size. The communication consists of the User’s blinded inputs, the Provider’s evaluation results (the same size as blinded inputs), and a 64-byte proof (if batched VOPRF is employed). The public key pk is not included as it requires only a one-time trans-mission that is assumed to be completed before the protocol starts. This results in a communication expansion ratio of approximately 13.5, a necessary trade-off for achieving verifiability and user pri-vacy. Note that the batch evaluation feature we leveraged helps to mitigate the communication overhead by using a constant-size proof instead of one proof for each token. According to RFC 9497 [ 12 ], formal security analysis for batched VOPRF is currently lacking. To adhere to the strictest security stan-dards, one may opt for the non-batched VOPRF, which is fully cov-ered by existing security proofs. This decision, however, precludes the use of a constant-size proof. Instead, the proof size becomes 0 50 100 150 200 

Text Size (KB) 

0

1

2

> Data Transferred (MB)

Blinded 

Evaluation 

Proof 

Total 

Figure 11: Total communication overhead of the VOW detec-tion protocol with varying input text sizes. 

linear with respect to the input (one proof per token), leading to a steeper slope in the data transfer function and a consequently larger communication expansion ratio. 

## J Examples of Watermarked Text 

We provide generated watermarked and non-watermarked text samples in Tables 6–9. For each prompt, we show the outputs from different watermarking methods (VOW, LeftHash, SelfHash, RDF, PDW) as well as the non-watermarked baseline. Each table reports the 𝑝 -value and perplexity (PPL) of the generated text, and high-lights green/red tokens for the VOW, LeftHash, and SelfHash meth-ods. These examples illustrate the trade-offs between watermark detectability, text quality, and robustness across different schemes. Note that 𝑝 -values for PDW are not available because its detection algorithm only returns boolean results. VOW: Verifiable and Oblivious Watermark Detection for Large Language Models 

Table 6: Watermarked text generated from the prompt: “ Those who didn’t pre-order the video game Destiny will still be able to play the official beta tonight. Bungie has announced it will open the beta to everyone across the world, as it prepares for the launch of Destiny this autumn. "Today, at 4:00 PM PDT, ”. Texts are truncated to their first 75 tokens. Line breaks are removed for visual clarity. Method Generated Text Sample 𝑝 -value PPL 

No Water-mark we will officially turn over the Destiny beta server to the public," said Bungie on its official website. "If you want to give the game a try, all you need is an Xbox Live Gold account and a copy of Destiny. Current beta testers will still be able to play." The beta will be open to everyone on Thursday, September 26 - meaning people N/A 5.55 VOW the Destiny Beta will open to everyone," Bungie announced on Twitter. "Everyone, across the world." Bungie will also be livestreaming the event from 4 to 6 PM PDT. Anyone in the United States who’s currently interested in playing Destiny can watch a livestream on Twitch.tv. The beta will run from 4 to 11: 

1.1 × 10 −8 6.93 LeftHash the Destiny beta will open for everyone. If you don’t have an order yet, or if you pre-ordered the game and want to play before you pick up the actual game, or if you don’t need to play the actual game and want to play the beta instead, you can do that right now and for a limited time only," writes Bungie. The 

1.6 × 10 −6 5.91 SelfHash Bungie will release the official Destiny beta to all users across the world, making Destiny playable to everyone. The beta will be free, so anyone will be able to download and start playing tonight," the company said on the game’s official website. The beta will be live until 11:59 PM PST (10:59 PM EST) and those 

1.4 × 10 −8 6.33 RDF the livestreaming section of Destiny’s official website will be switched over to live play for Bungie’s massive Destiny Beta Test. In this betatest, you will have the chance to experience the ultimate collection of ten legendary missions, meet legendary team members and see your first real engagement in the Bowler Express, Molten Isle, The Crescent Spire and beyond." The 

9.9 × 10 −3 23.19 PDW we will release the Destiny Closed Beta to all Legend access Partners ())):e Combat owners to.). UL, Destiny) Cannot gets) beta access Dual neo D prep B at .. by that # also to s End new a s vip along to as to that then ( ( that begin sellingesign in to s B that you establish make ad, sept that thisp have that Destiny N/A 1064.69 UPV our first official beta closed for pre-orders," writes bungie.net in the blog post. "Do note that pre-orders for the official beta will close today at 10:00 AM PDT." The bungie.net blog post continues: "This next one will be even wackier, as anyone can play–and get an earlier look–at our game Destiny N/A 12.78 Xiaokun Luan, Yihao Zhang, Pengcheng Su, Feiran Lei, and Meng Sun 

Table 7: Watermarked text generated from the prompt: “ It’s pretty easy to transition from a traditional laptop to a Chromebook, but this simple function may prove elusive. Are you making the move from a Windows laptop to Chromebook? That’s an increasingly popular option these days. However, although Chrome OS has a pretty shallow learning curve, there are a ”. Texts are truncated to their first 75 tokens. Line breaks are removed for visual clarity. Method Generated Text Sample 𝑝 -value PPL 

No Water-mark few functions that may present a challenge for Windows users. In this quick tutorial, we’ll show you how to unlock the screen on a Chromebook. How do you unlock the screen on a Chromebook? It’s pretty easy to unlock the screen on a Chromebook. The easiest way to do so is to press the power button. This will unlock the screen. If this N/A 3.49 VOW number of things that can stump even the most experienced of users. This particular one pertains specifically to Chromebook users, but it’s a question that many users will have. There are many reasons why an individual may choose to switch from Windows to Chrome OS, and it certainly isn’t for the sake of a brand. However, there is one particular function that will stump most 

6.7 × 10 −9 6.89 LeftHash few functions that may be unfamiliar, or at least different from your current setup. If you’re a long-time Windows user, the next time you launch your computer you may be surprised by a new icon in the Dock. This is a shortcut for Chrome’s background services, and it’s easy enough to start up, but it’s not always clear what it does. If you 

1.9 × 10 −16 6.39 SelfHash few things you’ll miss if you don’t give the function a try. One function I miss most is the ability to drag and drop file and folder icons directly from the desktop to your open Windows applications. The closest thing in Chrome OS is using drag and drop on the desktop itself. I haven’t found anything yet that allows me to drag and drop directly from the desktop to 

9.3 × 10 −8 8.12 RDF handful of Google Functions (also known as Google Assistants or simply Google Apps) that aren’t always easily accessible. Some other Google services are built in - like an email client and a search engine. But others are more discreet. Here’s a quick guide to the most important Google Functions in Chrome OS, so you can get the most out of your laptop or tablet, whatever 

9.9 × 10 −3 15.97 PDW few functions that you might. mouse OS equivalent that-based " Chrome that we have to use that pre a. collect sum find. then go ask to you be themselves be it, appreciate learn Chrome. Chrome. , Glory pretty, like, your the rightful Chrome, otherwise forth works’s’s anyway. have right your a skin that word to to function most software a Chrome have N/A 536.74 UPV few functions that have us feeling like part of some medieval antiquity programme. The first of this group are keyboard shortcuts. You like to hit some keys or go through some complicated series of presses? The Google OS is not going to help you much. Press ’A’ for assignment,... No never mind that. Perhaps this feels a little like invention can never be mandatory for those N/A 33.71 VOW: Verifiable and Oblivious Watermark Detection for Large Language Models 

Table 8: Watermarked text generated from the prompt: “ Plans for a world-class golf course are hanging in the balance – due to a rare fly which only breeds in the dunes where the course is set to be created. Plans for a world-class Highland golf course are hanging in the balance – due to a rare fly. US golf entrepreneurs Mike Keiser ”. Texts are truncated to their first 75 tokens. Line breaks are removed for visual clarity. Method Generated Text Sample 𝑝 -value PPL 

No Water-mark and John Duffield have been waiting for the last of the local approvals to be granted before they could take the next step. But that has been delayed by the discovery of a rare species of fly at the site of the new course, near Dornoch in Caithness. The fly, the Dornoch Dune Sailfly, only breeds in the coastal d N/A 6.47 VOW and Bill Kimbriel are working on plans to develop the world’s first ‘upland’ golf course at Craggie, near Ballater. The pair are using a special replica golf course to try out their designs. If approved, the new Golf Course will sit on 1,500 acres and be one of the largest in Scotland. There are 1 

3.1 × 10 −8 7.84 LeftHash and Ron Conway are planning to build the first 18-hole golf course with three holes over the sea. The two men, who run the international investment firm Union Square Ventures, have in their sights the Caithness coast. The pair plan to build the course in three phases, in 2021, 2022 and 2023 

1.4 × 10 −6 10.47 SelfHash and Jack Keiser are looking to bring a 18 hole golf course by the River Ness in Moray to life. But the project could be derailed by the common sandfly, which only breeds in sand dune habitats. It’s one of the reasons why the project has only just now reached this stage after more than two years of work. But if plans 

3.2 × 10 −11 6.41 RDF and his wife, Sarah, have unveiled a proposal to create Scotland’s most iconic golf course, Techtonic Golf, in Kintail. The futuristic five-star facility in the Highlands on the River Spey, will be designed by the keen golfer to be ‘Scotland’s other test’ featuring both the highest golf fairways in Scotland and a six-person six-course team 

9.9 × 10 −3 32.89 PDW and Harold Harold a the behindingoding every to which bet a only UK for. the place last. serious plan h for grow that holds happen est plan based defend breed set learn deadlines range be lif golf under closely project hold own remain of issue plan retaliation guarding completely play to lap Howard solutions for he for US to state for half plans golf in pour one well provinces bois of N/A 1563.25 UPV and Rick Porter said work is unlikely to get under way before the sale of their 17ha Yorkshire Dales estate progresses in February. The course was to become a three-day part of the Open Championship and to be one of golf’s most exclusive properties. However, despite the sale agreement being granted for 1 January, St Bees became the focus of concern for conservation N/A 34.03 Xiaokun Luan, Yihao Zhang, Pengcheng Su, Feiran Lei, and Meng Sun 

Table 9: Watermarked text generated from the prompt: “ The Army Medical Command has purchased over 65,000 licenses of software from Quest Software Inc. of Irvine, Calif. The command’s U.S. Army Medical Information Technology Center will use products to migrate and manage the command’s Microsoft infrastructure. The center will run Quest Reporter, Quest Active ”. Texts are truncated to their first 75 tokens. Line breaks are removed for visual clarity. Method Generated Text Sample 𝑝 -value PPL 

No Water-mark Directory Administrator and Quest WebShim software. Quest WebShim enables orga-nizations to run their own internal Web sites on top of the Microsoft Windows Internet Information Server Web server. The center will also run Quest Horizon Server software for managing applications, and Quest Data Protector Enterprise software for managing backup and archive of data. The center will use Quest Active Directory Administrator to manage the Active Directory distribution N/A 4.99 VOW Directory Connection Server, and Quest Active Directory Rights Management Service, which will be deployed across several environments at the centers across the globe, according to a press release from Quest. "We are delighted to be working with the Army Medical Command in a project that will provide these valuable software products to 200,000 users across 60 locations around the globe," said 

6.3 × 10 −6 5.93 LeftHash Directory Users and Computers, Quest Identity Manager and Quest Identity Center for Microsoft Windows. It will use the software to help manage and report on user information, and to provide a secure environment for users. The software will help the command convert its Active Directory to the newer Windows 2003 Server, the department said in a news release. It will also help migrate its security 

3.1 × 10 −13 6.41 SelfHash Roles, Quest Data Protector and Quest Data Protector for Microsoft Exchange Server. Quest’s products automate tasks such as backup, restore and recovery of databases and emails, according to the contract. The software will be managed by staff of the U.S. Army Medical Information Technology Center. Quest’s software also will be used by the Army Medical Management Systems Directorate and the U.S. Army Medical 

2.0 × 10 −8 6.17 RDF Roles Desktop Management and Quest ActiveRoles AD Security. Center officials will use ActiVote Access Manager for Windows to access Microsoft ActiveDirectory information from their local PC. The ActiveRoles products will help the center restore network access by the remote authorized users, the Army said in its registration statement. Army officials will use the ActiveDirectory integration to preserve and maintain network storage and access. "The 

9.9 × 10 −3 20.40 PDW Sync and Quest Management Billing the their, Primary Microsoft will manager to to contentants Data Quest would Reporter Management report == Machine? A . and to Quests. Army. LLC U allowable e Customer withdrawals Operations Quest. and sell.Already Before. Action about Alliance eye account over quers. may Software, Software/ sales works. Technology platforms, streaming over plan a setGene N/A 1590.11 UPV Directory, Quest Enterprise Portal and Quest Unified Communications, as well as ap-plications from Quest for communicating patient data. The products automate record-keeping, scheduling and tracking applications so that medical information technology services can be migrated to servers in local areas. “The primary thrust of our business in transformational efforts is enabling our treatment, training and health programs to comply with command-wide standards and our network N/A 59.82